The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Texas Cow Boy, by Chas. A. Siringo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Texas Cow Boy
       or, fifteen years on the hurricane deck of a Spanish pony,
       taken from real life

Author: Chas. A. Siringo

Release Date: December 15, 2011 [EBook #38309]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TEXAS COW BOY ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  A TEXAS COW BOY

  OR

  FIFTEEN YEARS ON THE HURRICANE
  DECK OF A SPANISH PONY.

  TAKEN FROM REAL LIFE BY

  Chas. A. Siringo.

  AN OLD STOVE UP COW PUNCHER WHO
  HAS SPENT NEARLY A LIFE TIME ON THE
  GREAT WESTERN
  CATTLE RANGES.

  GLOBE LITHOGRAPHING & PRINTING CO. CHICAGO

  Illustration: REPRESENTATION OF LIFE IN A COW CAMP.

  Illustration: THE AUTHOR, IN COW BOY UNIFORM.




  A TEXAS COW BOY

  OR,

  FIFTEEN YEARS

  ON THE

  Hurricane Deck of a Spanish Pony.

  TAKEN FROM REAL LIFE

  BY

  CHAS. A. SIRINGO,

  AN OLD STOVE UP "COW PUNCHER," WHO HAS SPENT
  NEARLY TWENTY YEARS ON THE GREAT
  WESTERN CATTLE RANGES.

  M. UMBDENSTOCK & CO., Publishers,
  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS.
  1885.

  Illustration: THE AUTHOR
  after he became stove-up--financially, as well as otherwise.




INDEX.


      CHAPTER.                                       PAGE.

       I. My Boyhood Days                               13

      II. My Introduction to the late war               20

     III. My First Lesson in Cow Punching               31

      IV. My second experience in St. Louis             43

       V. A New experience                              53

      VI. Adopted and sent to school                    61

     VII. Back at last to the Lone Star State           68

    VIII. Learning to rope wild steers                  75

      IX. Owning my first cattle                        84

       X. A start up the Chisholm trail                 95

      XI. Buys a boat and becomes a sailor             103

     XII. Back to my favorite occupation, that of
          a wild and woolly Cow Boy                    112

    XIII. Mother and I meet at last                    119

     XIV. On a tare in Wichita, Kansas                 129

      XV. A lonely trip down the Cimeron               141

     XVI. My first experience roping a Buffalo         150

    XVII. An exciting trip after thieves               158

   XVIII. Seven weeks among Indians                    164

     XIX. A lonely ride of eleven hundred miles        176

      XX. Another start up the Chisholm trail          186

     XXI. A trip which terminated in the capture
          of "Billy the Kid"                           196

    XXII. Billy the Kid's capture                      215

   XXIII. A trip to the Rio Grande on a mule           223

    XXIV. Waylaid by unknown parties                   231

     XXV. Lost on the Staked Plains                    239

    XXVI. A trip down the Reo Pecos                    255

   XXVII. A true sketch of "Billy the Kid's" life      269

  XXVIII. Wrestling with a dose of Small Pox on
          the Llano Esticado                           285

    XXIX. In love with a Mexican girl                  299

     XXX. A sudden leap from Cow Boy to Merchant       309




Copyrighted by CHAS. A. SIRINGO, Caldwell, Kans.

All rights reserved.




PREFACE.


My excuse for writing this book is money--and lots of it.

I suppose the above would suffice, but as time is not very precious I
will continue and tell how the idea of writing a book first got into my
head:

While ranching on the Indian Territory line, close to Caldwell, Kansas,
in the winter of '82 and '83, we boys--there being nine of us--made an
iron-clad rule that whoever was heard swearing or caught picking grey
backs off and throwing them on the floor without first killing them,
should pay a fine of ten cents for each and every offense. The proceeds
to be used for buying choice literature--something that would have a
tendency to raise us above the average cow-puncher. Just twenty-four
hours after making this rule we had three dollars in the pot--or at
least in my pocket, I having been appointed treasurer.

As I was going to town that night to see my Sunday girl, I proposed to
the boys that, while up there, I send the money off for a years
subscription to some good newspaper. The question then came up, what
paper shall it be? We finally agreed to leave it to a vote--each man to
write the one of his choice on a slip of paper and drop it in a hat.
There being two young Texans present who could neither read nor write,
we let them _speak_ their choice after the rest of us got our votes
deposited. At the word given them to cut loose they both yelled "Police
Gazette", and on asking why they voted for that wicked Sheet, they both
replied as though with one voice: "Cause we can read the pictures." We
found, on counting the votes that the Police Gazette had won, so it was
subscribed for.

With the first copy that arrived was the beginning of a continued story,
entitled "Potts turning Paris inside out." Mr. Potts, the hero, was an
old stove-up New York preacher, who had made a raise of several hundred
thousand dollars and was over in Paris blowing it in. I became
interested in the story, and envied Mr. Potts very much. I wished for a
few hundred thousand so I could do likewise; I lay awake one whole night
trying to study up a plan by which I could make the desired amount. But,
thinks I, what can an uneducated cow puncher do now-a-days to make such
a vast sum? In trying to solve the question my mind darted back a few
years, when, if I had taken time by the forelock, I might have now been
wallowing in wealth with the rest of the big cattle kings--or to use a
more appropriate name, cattle thieves. But alas! thought I, the days of
honorable cattle stealing is past, and I must turn my mind into a
healthier channel.

The next morning while awaiting breakfast I happened to pick up a small
scrap of paper and read: "To the young man of high aims literature
offers big inducements, providing he gets into an untrodden field."

That night I lay awake again, trying to locate some "cussed" untrodden
field, where, as an author, I might soar on high--to the extent of a few
hundred thousand at least.

At last, just as our pet rooster, "Deacon Bates" was crowing for day, I
found a field that I had never heard of any one trampling over--a
"nigger" love story. So that night I launched out on my new novel, the
title of which was, "A pair of two-legged coons." My heroine, Miss Patsy
Washington was one shade darker than the ace of spades, while her lover,
Mr. Andrew Jackson, was three colors darker than herself. My plot was
laid in African Bend on the Colorado river in Southern Texas.

Everything went on nicely, until about half way through the first
chapter, when Mr. Jackson was convicted and sent to Huntsville for
stealing a neighbors hog; and while I was trying to find a substitute
for him, old Patsy flew the track and eloped with a Yankee
carpet-bagger. That was more than I could endure, so picking up the
manuscript I threw it into the fire. Thus ended my first attempt at
Authorship.

I then began figuring up an easier field for my inexperienced pen, and
finally hit upon the idea of writing a history of my own short, but
rugged life, which dear reader you have before you. But whether it will
bring me in "shekels" enough to capsize Paris remains yet to be
"disskivered" as the Negro says.




A TEXAS COW BOY.




CHAPTER I.

MY BOYHOOD DAYS.


It was a bright morning, on the 7th day of February 1856, as near as I
can remember, that your humble Servant came prancing into this wide and
wicked world.

By glancing over the map you will find his birthplace, at the extreme
southern part of the Lone Star State, on the Peninsula of Matagorda, a
narrow strip of land bordered by the Gulf of Mexico on the south and
Matagorda Bay on the north.

This Peninsula is from one to two miles wide and seventy five miles
long. It connects the mainland at Caney and comes to a focus at Deskrows
Point or "Salura Pass." About midway between the two was situated the
"Dutch Settlement," and in the centre of that Settlement, which
contained only a dozen houses, stood the little frame cottage that first
gave me shelter.

My father who died when I was only a year old, came from the sunny clime
of Italy, while my dear old mother drifted from the Boggs of good "ould"
Ireland. Am I not a queer conglomerate--a sweet-scented mixture indeed!

Our nearest neighbor was a kind old soul by the name of John Williams,
whose family consisted of his wife and eleven children.

In the fall of 1859 I took my first lessons in school, my teacher being
a Mr. Hale from Illinois.

The school house, a little old frame building, stood off by itself,
about a mile from the Settlement, and we little tow-heads, sister and I,
had to hoof it up there every morning, through the grassburrs,
barefooted; our little sunbrowned feet had never been incased in
shoe-leather up to that time.

To avoid the grassburrs, sometimes on getting an early start we would go
around by the Gulf beach which was quite a distance out of our way. In
taking this route though, I would generally be late at school, for there
were so many little things to detain me--such as trying to catch the
shadow of a flying sea gull, or trying to lasso sand crabs on my stick
horse.

Crowds of Cow Boys used to come over to the Peninsula from the mainland
and sometimes have occasion to rope wild steers in my presence--hence me
trying to imitate them.

I remember getting into a scrape once by taking the beach route to
school; sister who was a year older than I, was walking along the water
edge picking up pretty shells while I was riding along on my stick horse
taking the kinks out of my rope--a piece of fishline--so as to be ready
to take in the first crab that showed himself. Those crabs went in large
droves and sometimes ventured quite a distance out from the Gulf, but on
seeing a person would break for the water.

It was not long before I spied a large drove on ahead, pulling their
freight for the water. I put spurs to my pony and dashed after them. I
managed to get one old fat fellow headed off and turned towards the
prairie. I threw at him several times but he would always go through the
loop before I could pull it up. He finally struck a hole and
disappeared.

I was determined to get him out and take another whirl at him, so
dropping my horse and getting down on all fours I began digging the
sand away with my hands, dog fashion.

About that time sister came up and told me to come on as I would be late
at school, etc.

I think I told her to please go to Halifax, as I was going to rope that
crab before I quit or "bust." At any rate she went off, leaving me
digging with all my might.

Every now and then I would play dog by sticking my snoot down in the
hole to smell. But I rammed it down once too often. Mr. Crab was nearer
the surface than I thought for. He was laying for me. I gave a comanche
yell, jumped ten feet in the air and lit out for home at a 2:40 gait.
One of his claws was fastened to my upper lip while the other clamped my
nose with an iron-like grip.

I met Mr. William Berge coming out to the beach after a load of wood,
and he relieved me of my uncomfortable burden. He had to break the crabs
claws off to get him loose.

I arrived at school just as Mr. Hale was ringing the bell after recess.
He called me up and wanted to know what was the matter with my face, it
was so bloody. Being a little George W., minus the hatchet, I told him
the truth. Suffice to say he laid me across his knee and made me think
a nest of bumble bees were having a dance in the seat of my breeches--or
at least where the seat should have been. I never had a pair of pants on
up to that time. Had worn nothing but a long white shirt made of a flour
sack after some of the "big bugs" in Matagorda had eaten the flour out.

The fall of 1861 Mr. Hale broke up school and left for Yankeedom to join
the blue coats. And from that time on I had a regular picnic, doing
nothing and studying mischief. Billy Williams was my particular chum; we
were constantly together doing some kind of devilment. The old women
used to say we were the meanest little imps in the Settlement, and that
we would be hung before we were twenty-one. Our three favorite passtimes
were, riding the milk calves, coon hunting and sailing play-boats down
on the bay shore.

Shortly after school broke up I wore my first pair of breeches. Uncle
"Nick" and aunt "Mary," mothers' brother and sister, who lived in
Galveston, sent us a trunk full of clothes and among them was a pair of
white canvas breeches for me.

The first Sunday after the goods arrived mother made me scour myself all
over and try my new pants on. They were large enough for two kids of my
size, but mother said I could wear them that day if I would be a good
boy, and that she would take a few tucks in them before the next Sunday.
So after getting me fixed up she told me not to leave the yard or she
would skin me alive, etc.

Of course I should have been proud of the new addition to my wardrobe
and like a good little boy obeyed my mother; but I wasn't a good little
boy and besides the glory of wearing white pants was insignificant
compared to that of an exciting coon hunt with dogs through brush,
bramble and rushes. You see I had promised Billy the evening before to
go coon hunting with him that day.

I watched my chance and while mother was dressing sister in her new
frock I tiptoed out of the house and skipped.

Billy was waiting for me with the four dogs and off we went for the Bay
shore.

Arriving there the dogs disappeared in the tall rushes barking at every
jump; we jumped right in after them, up to our waists in the mud. We had
a genuine good all-day coon hunt, killing several coons and one wild
cat.

We gave up the hunt about sundown, and I started for home, the glory of
my new pants having departed. I was indeed a sorry looking sight,
covered with mud from head to foot.

I entered the house with some fear and trembling, and well I might, for
mother was "laying" for me with the old black strap. The result was I
slept sound that night, but couldn't sit down without pain for a week
afterwards.




CHAPTER II.

MY INTRODUCTION TO THE LATE WAR.


It was Monday morning--a day that I despised. Need you wonder, for it
was mother's wash day and I had to carry wood from the Gulf beach to
keep the "pot boiling."

I tried to play off sick that morning but it would not work, for mother
had noticed that I got away with two plates of mush besides three hard
boiled eggs for breakfast.

Before starting out after my first load of wood, I hid the big old strap
which hung by the door, for I felt it in my bones there was war in the
air. I always did have a tough time of it on wash days, and I knew this
Monday would bring the same old story.

At last mother got the fire started under the wash-pot which stood out
in the yard and told me for about the twentieth time to go after an
armful of wood. I hesitated, in hopes that she would take a notion to go
herself, but when she stamped her foot and picked up a barrel stave I
knew I had better be going, for when she got her Irish blood up it was
dangerous to linger.

When I got out among the drift wood on the beach, I treed a cotton-tail
rabbit up a hollow log, and I made up my mind to get Mr. cotton-tail
out, wood or no wood.

I began digging the sand away from the log as fast as I could so as to
be able to roll it down into the Gulf and drown the rabbit out.

It was a very hot day and digging the heavy sand with only my hands and
a stick was slow, tiresome work. The result was I fell asleep with my
head under the log and my bare legs sticking out in the hot June sun. I
dreamt I died and went to a dreadful hot country and Satan was there
piling hot coals on me.

Finally the sun went under a cloud, or at least I suppose it did, for
the burning pain left me and I began to dream of Heaven; I thought the
Lord was there sitting upon His throne of gold in the midst of scores of
happy children. Calling me up to him he pointed to a large pile of fence
rails down in a beautiful valley and said: "my boy you go down and carry
every one of those rails up here to me before you stop."

His words landed up against my happy thoughts like a thunderbolt from a
clear sky. I had been thinking of what a picnic I would have with the
other children.

A walk of about one mile brought me to the pile of rails; there were
more in the pile than I could count, I shouldered one of the lightest
and struck out up the steep hill, thinking how I would like to be back
with mother, even if I had to carry an armful of wood from the beach now
and then.

When about half way up the hill I heard a terrible noise such as I had
never heard before, it awakened me, and in trying to jump up I bumped my
head against the log, and also filled my eyes full of sand.

When I got onto my feet and the sand out of my eyes, I discovered the
whole beach, east of me, thronged with men carrying guns, and marching
right towards me. The head ones were not over a hundred yards off,
beating drums and blowing their horns.

It is needless to say I was scared and that I ran as fast as my legs
could carry me, looking back every minute to see if they were after me.
It was in this way that I ran or sprang right into the midst of Mrs.
Zipprian's drove of geese, before I knew it. There were several old
ganders in the drove which used to chase me every chance they got. I
generally took particular pains to go around them; but this time my mind
was in a different channel from what it had ever been in before, hence
my not looking out for them.

As I flew past, two of the old ganders made a dive at me, but only one
succeeded in catching on; he grabbed the tail of my shirt, which stuck
straight out behind, in his mouth and hung on with blood in his eyes. My
speed seemed to increase instead of slacken, every time the old gander
would bounce up and come down, his claws would rake the skin from the
calves of my legs. His death-like grip finally broke loose and I felt
considerable lighter. My mind also, felt somewhat relieved.

Mother was out in the yard washing, she had picked up chips enough to
boil the water; the tub was sitting upon a box and she was rubbing away
with all her might, her back towards me. As I was looking over my
shoulder I ran against her, knocking her, tub and all over in a pile,
myself with them.

Mother got up first with her right hand in my shirt collar, I plead
manfully, and tried to tell her about the scores of men, but she was
too mad to listen, she dragged me to where the big black strap should
have hung, I knew she couldn't find it, therefore hoped to get off with
a few slaps, but alas, no she spied the mush stick and the way she gave
it to me with that was a caution!

The crowd I saw proved to be Dr. Pierceson's company of rebels, who had
been sent over from Matagorda to drill and be ready to fight the blue
coats when they came. It was then the summer of 1862. They located their
camp on the beach, about a mile from our house, and I used to march with
them all day long sometimes. The captain, Dr. Pierceson, gave me an
umbrella stick which I used for a gun.

That coming fall about five thousand Yankees landed at Deckrows Point on
the Peninsula and marched by our ranch on their way to the rebel camp
which was stationed forty miles above, at the mouth of Caney Creek.

They camped one night close to our house and filled me up with
hard-tack, which was quite a treat to a fellow living on mush and milk.

They had a five or six day fight with the rebels, neither of them coming
off victorious. We could hear the guns plainly from the "Settlement."
Many dead men were washed ashore on the beach. My sister and I stumbled
onto one poor fellow one day, shot through the heart. His clothes were
gone and his wrist was marked "J. T." in India ink.

After the battle the Yankees marched back to Deckrows Point where they
remained to the end of the war; the rebels still held their ground at
the mouth of Caney. Every now and then a squad from each side would meet
at the "Settlement" and have a skirmish. I remember once after one of
those skirmishes a crowd of Yankees rounded Mr. Williams up on the
prairie--Billy and I being with him--and throwing their pistols in his
face told him if they ever found him so far from home again they would
kill him.

Their threats didn't scare Mr. Williams the least bit, for he afterwards
slipped into their camp after dark and stole eleven head of their best
horses and gave them to the rebels. But on his way back from the rebel
ramp, where he went to take the horses they caught him and took him
aboard of a Yankee man-of-war to hang him. They had the rope around his
neck ready to swing him when the General turned him loose, on account of
his old age and bravery, telling him never to be caught from home
again.

Fighting was going on nearly every day in sight of us; sometimes the
Yankee gun boats would get into the Bay among the rebel boats, and at
other times they would fight across the narrow strip of land, shooting
right over the houses at one another. Many of the cannon balls dropped
on the prairie; one of them at one time struck within a few feet of Mr.
Williams, almost burying him in the sand as it plowed along on the
ground. Poor fellow, he was afterwards killed by one, he carried one
home and taking all the powder out of it, as he supposed, set it out in
the yard with the hole up, and then told Billy to get him a coal of fire
in the tongs. He thought it would just flash a little.

I was present, and not liking the looks of it, crept out behind the
picket gate, a few yards away, and peeped between the pickets.

The whole family was looking on to see the fun, Mattie, one of the
little girls, was sitting with her arms around a dog's neck, within a
few feet of it.

Billy, arriving with the coal, handed it to his father who reached over
and let it drop down into the hole--where he had taken out the lead
screw.

It seemed to me that the coal hadn't reached the hole when the thing
exploded. For a few seconds everything was enveloped in smoke; when the
smoke disappeared sufficiently for me to see, the whole sky seemed to be
a blaze of fire, and finally Mr. Williams emerged out of the heavy cloud
of smoke hopping on one leg.

A piece of the bomb-shell had taken off part of one foot on the left leg
and another piece had plowed through the calf of his right leg; part of
one ear was also gone. He only lived a few days.

A piece of the shell took off one of the dog's legs without even
touching Mattie, the little girl who had her arms around his neck.

Several pieces went through the house, and one piece went through the
picket gate right over my head. The next day Billy and I found a large
piece sticking in the wall of an old vacant house a mile from where it
exploded.

During the war several ships were driven ashore on the beach by the
Yankee gun boats. The folks at the "Settlement" would get all the
plunder. One ship was loaded with dry goods and from that time on I wore
breeches.

About a year after the war broke out the rebels gathered up all the
cattle on the Peninsula and drove them to the mainland, where they were
turned loose with the thousands upon thousands of wild cattle already
over there. Their idea in doing so was to keep the Yankees--whom they
knew would hold the lower part of the Peninsula, they having the best
gunboats--from getting fresh beef to eat. There was only one cow left in
the whole "Settlement" and that was our old "Browny;" mother had begged
manfully for them to leave her, for she knew we children would starve to
death living on mush straight.

When the war broke up everybody was happy. We cheered for joy when Mr.
Joe Yeamans brought the good news from town.

Shortly after this all of the men and boys that were large enough, went
over to the mainland to gather up the Peninsula cattle. On their arrival
they found it a bigger job than they had figured on, for they were
scattered over two or three hundred miles of country and as wild as
deer.

Billy and I thought it very hard that we could not go and be Cow Boys
too; but we had lots of fun all by ourselves, for we had an old mule and
two or three ponies to ride, so you see we practiced riding in
anticipation of the near future, when we would be large enough to be Cow
Boys.

After being gone about three months the crowd came back, bringing with
them several hundred head of cattle, which they had succeeded in
gathering. Among them were about twenty head belonging to mother.

The crowd went right back after more. This stimulated Billy and I to
become a crowd of Cow Boys all by ourselves, therefore we put in most of
our time lassoing and riding wild yearlings, etc. We hardly stayed at
home long enough to get our meals. Mother had to get her own wood in
those days, for sister had gone to school in Galveston. Of course I
always had to come home at night, therefore mother would get
satisfaction out of me with the black strap or mush stick, after I was
snugly settled in bed, for my waywardness and trifling habits.

In the spring of 1867, a cattle man by the name of Faldien brought his
family over to the Peninsula for their health and rented part of our
house to live in.

After getting his wife and babies located in their new quarters, he
started back home, in Matagorda, to make preparations for spring work,
he having to rig up new outfits, etc. He persuaded mother to let me go
with him, and learn to run cattle. When she consented I was the happiest
boy in the "Settlement," for my life long wish was about to be
gratified.




CHAPTER III.

MY FIRST LESSON IN COW PUNCHING.


The next day after arriving in town, Mr. Faldien sent me out to his
ranch, twenty miles, on Big Boggy. I rode out on the "grub" wagon with
the colored cook. That night, after arriving at the ranch, there being
several men already there, we went out wild boar hunting. We got back
about midnight very tired and almost used up. Such a hunt was very
different from the coon hunts Billy and I used to have at the
"Settlement." Our dogs were badly gashed up by the boars, and it was a
wonder some of us hadn't been served the same way.

In a few days Mr. Faldien came out to the ranch, bringing with him
several men. After spending a few days gathering up the cow-ponies,
which hadn't been used since the fall before, we started for Lake
Austin--a place noted for wild cattle.

During the summer I was taken sick and had to go home. I was laid up for
two months with typhoid fever. Every one thought I would die.

That fall, about October, mother married a man by the name of Carrier,
who hailed from Yankeedom. He claimed that he owned a farm in Michigan,
besides lots of other property.

He was very anxious to get back to his farm, so persuaded mother to sell
out lock, stock and barrel and go with him.

She had hard work to find a buyer as money was very scarce, but finally
she got Mr. George Burkheart, a merchant in Matagorda, to set his own
price on things and take them.

The house and one hundred and seventy-five acres of land only brought
one hundred and seventy-five dollars. The sixty head of cattle that we
had succeeded in getting back from the mainland went at one dollar a
head and all others that still remained on the mainland--thrown in for
good measure.

At last everything for sale was disposed of and we got "Chris" Zipprian
to take us to Indianola in his schooner. We bade farewell to the old
homestead with tears in our eyes. I hated more than anything else to
leave old "Browny" behind for she had been a friend in need as well as a
friend indeed. Often when I would be hungry and afraid to go home for
fear of mother and the mush stick, she would let me go up to her on the
prairie calf fashion and get my milk. She was nearly as old as myself.

At Indianola we took the Steamship "Crescent City" for New Orleans. The
first night out we ran into a large Brig and came very near going under.
The folks on the Brig were nearly starved to death, having been drifting
about for thirty days without a rudder. We took them in tow, after
getting our ship in trim again, and landed them safely in Galveston.

There was a bar-room on our ship, and our new lord and master, Mr.
Carrier, put in his spare time drinking whisky and gambling; I do not
think he drew a sober breath from the time we left Indianola until we
landed in New Orleans, by that time he had squandered every cent
received for the homestead and cattle, so mother had to go down into her
stocking and bring out the little pile of gold which she had saved up
before the war for "hard times," as she used to say. With this money she
now bought our tickets to Saint Louis. We took passage, I think, on the
"Grand Republic." There was also a bar-room on this boat, and after
wheedling mother out of the remainder of her funds, he drank whisky and
gambled as before, so we landed in Saint Louis without a cent.

Mother had to pawn her feather mattress and pillows for a month's rent
in an old delapidated frame building on one of the back streets. It
contained only four rooms, two up stairs and two down; the lower rooms
were occupied by the stingy old landlord and family; we lived in one of
the upper rooms, while a Mr. Socks, whose wife was an invalid, occupied
the other.

The next day after getting established in our new quarters, the "old
man," as I called him, struck out to find a job; he found one at a
dollar a day shoveling coal.

At first he brought home a dollar every night, then a half and finally a
quarter. At last he got to coming home drunk without a nickel in his
pocket. He finally came up missing; we didn't know what had become of
him. Mother was sick in bed at the time from worrying. I went out
several times hunting work but no one would even give me a word of
encouragement, with the exception of an old Jew who said he was sorry
for me.

A little circumstance happened, shortly after the "old man" pulled his
trifling carcass for parts unknown, which made me a better boy and no
doubt a better man than I should have been had it never happened.

Everything was white without, for it had been snowing for the past two
days. It was about five o'clock in the evening and the cold piercing
north wind was whistling through the unceiled walls of our room. Mother
was sound asleep, while sister and I sat shivering over an old, broken
stove, which was almost cold, there being no fuel in the house.

Sister began crying and wondered why the Lord let us suffer so? I
answered that may be it was because we quit saying our prayers. Up to
the time we left Texas mother used to make us kneel down by the bed-side
and repeat the Lord's prayer every night before retiring. Since then she
had, from worrying, lost all interest in Heavenly affairs.

"Let us say our prayers now, then, brother!" said sister drying the
tears from her eyes.

We both knelt down against the old, rusty stove and commenced. About the
time we had finished the door opened and in stepped Mr. Socks with a
bundle under his arm. "Here children, is a loaf of bread and some
butter and I will bring you up a bucket of coal in a few moments, for I
suppose from the looks of the stove you are cold," said the good man,
who had just returned from his day's work.

Was ever a prayer so quickly heard? We enjoyed the bread and butter, for
we hadn't tasted food since the morning before.

The next day was a nice sunny one, and I struck out up town to try and
get a job shoveling snow from the sidewalks.

The first place I tackled was a large stone front on Pine street. The
kind lady of the establishment said she would give me twenty-five cents
if I would do a good job cleaning the sidewalk in front of the house.

After an hour's hard work I finished, and, after paying me, the lady
told me to call next day and she would give me a job shoveling coal down
in the cellar, as I had done an extra good job on the sidewalk. This was
encouraging and I put in the whole day shoveling snow, but never found
any more twenty-five cent jobs; most I received for one whole hour's
work was ten cents, and then the old fat fellow kicked like a bay steer,
about the d----d snow being such an expense, etc.

From that time on I made a few dimes each day sawing wood or shoveling
coal and therefore got along splendid.

I forgot to mention my first evening in Saint Louis. I was going home
from the bakery when I noticed a large crowd gathered in front of a
corner grocery; I went up to see what they were doing. Two of the boys
had just gotten through fighting when I got there; the store-keeper and
four or five other men were standing in the door looking on at the crowd
of boys who were trying to cap another fight.

As I walked up, hands shoved clear to the bottom of my pockets, the
store-keeper called out, pointing at me, "there's a country Jake that
I'll bet can lick any two boys of his size in the crowd."

Of course all eyes were then turned onto me, which, no doubt, made me
look sheepish. One of the men asked me where I was from; when I told
him, the store-keeper exclaimed, "by gum, if he is from Texas I'll bet
two to one that he can clean out any two boys of his size in the crowd."

One of the other men took him up and they made a sham bet of ten
dollars, just to get me to fight. The two boys were then picked out;
one was just about my size and the other considerably smaller. They
never asked me if I would take a hand in the fight until everything was
ready. Of course I hated to crawl out, for fear they might think I was a
coward.

Everything being ready the store-keeper called out, "dive in boys!"

We had it up and down for quite a while, finally I got the largest one
down, and was putting it to him in good shape, when the other one picked
up a piece of brick-bat and began pounding me on the back of the head
with it. I looked up to see what he was doing and he struck me over one
eye with the bat. I jumped up and the little fellow took to his heels,
but I soon overtook him and blackened both of his eyes up in good shape,
before the other boy, who was coming at full tilt could get there to
help him. I then chased the other boy back to the crowd. That ended the
fight and I received two ginger-snaps, from the big hearted storekeeper,
for my trouble. I wore the nick-name of "Tex" from that time on, during
my stay in that neighborhood; and also wore a black eye, where the
little fellow struck me with the bat, for several days afterwards.

About the middle of January mother received a letter from the "old man,"
with ten dollars enclosed, and begging her to come right on without
delay as he had a good job and was doing well, etc. He was at Lebanon,
Ill., twenty-five miles from the city. The sight of ten dollars and the
inducements he held out made us hope that we would meet with better luck
there, so we packed up our few traps and started on the Ohio and
Mississippi railroad.

On arriving in Lebanon about nine o'clock at night we found the "old
man" there waiting for us.

The next morning we all struck out on foot, through the deep snow, for
Moore's ranch where the "old man" had a job chopping cord wood. A tramp
of seven miles brought us to the little old log cabin which was to be
our future home. A few rods from our cabin stood a white frame house in
which lived Mr. Moore and family.

Everything went on lovely for the first week, notwithstanding that the
cold winds whistled through the cracks in our little cabin, and we had
nothing to eat but corn bread, black coffee and old salt pork that Moore
could not find a market for.

The first Saturday after getting established in our new home the "old
man" went to town and got on a glorious drunk, squandered every nickel
he could rake and scrape; from that time on his visits to town were more
frequent than his trips to the woods, to work. At last I was compelled
to go to work for Moore at eight dollars a month, to help keep the wolf
from our door, and don't you forget it, I earned eight dollars a month,
working out in the cold without gloves and only half clothed.

Towards spring the "old man" got so mean and good-for-nothing that the
neighbors had to run him out of the country. A crowd of them surrounded
the house one night, took the old fellow out and preached him a sermon;
then they gave him until morning to either skip or be hung. You bet he
didn't wait until morning.

A short while afterwards mother took sister and went to town to hunt
work. She left her household goods with one of the near neighbors, a Mr.
Muck, where they still remain I suppose, if not worn out. But there was
nothing worth hauling off except the dishes. I must say the table ware
was good; we had gotten them from a Spanish vessel wrecked on the Gulf
beach during the war.

Mother found work in a private boarding house, and sister with a Mrs.
Bell, a miller's wife, while I still remained with Moore at the same
old wages.

Along in June sometime I quit Moore on account of having the ague. I
thought I should have money enough to take a rest until I got well, but
bless you I only had ninety cents to my credit, Moore had deducted
thirty-five dollars the "old man" owed him out of my earnings. I pulled
for town as mad as an old setting hen. But I soon found work again, with
an old fellow by the name of John Sargent, who was to give me eight
dollars a month, board and clothes and pay my doctor bills.

About the first of September mother and sister went to Saint Louis where
they thought wages would be higher. They bade me good bye, promising to
find me a place in the city, so I could be with them; also promised to
write.

Shortly afterwards I quit Mr. Sargent with only one dollar to my credit;
and that I havn't got yet. He charged me up with everything I got in the
shape of clothes, doctor bills, medicine, etc.

I then went to work for a carpenter, to learn the trade, for my board,
clothes, etc. I was to remain with him three years. My first day's work
was turning a big heavy stone for him to grind a lot of old, rusty tools
on. That night after supper I broke my contract, as I concluded that I
knew just as much about the carpenter's trade as I wished to know, and
skipped for the country, by moonlight.

I landed up at a Mr. Jacobs' farm twelve miles from town and got a job
of work at twelve dollars a month. I didn't remain there long though, as
I had a chill every other day regular, and therefore couldn't work much.

I made up my mind then to pull for Saint Louis and hunt mother and
sister. I had never heard a word from them since they left. After buying
a small satchel to put my clothes in and paying for a ticket to the
city, I had only twenty-five cents left and part of that I spent for
dinner that day.

I arrived in East Saint Louis about midnight with only ten cents left. I
wanted to buy a ginger-cake or something, as I was very hungry, but
hated to as I needed the dime to pay my way across the river next
morning. I wasn't very well posted then, in regard to the ways of
getting on in the world, or I would have spent the dime for something to
eat, and then beat my way across the river.




CHAPTER IV.

MY SECOND EXPERIENCE IN ST. LOUIS.


Bright and early next morning I gave my dime to the ferryman and pulled
out for the bustling city, where I was soon lost in the large crowd
which thronged the levee.

I left my satchel in a saloon and struck out to find Mr. Socks, hoping
he could give me some information as to mother and sister's whereabouts,
but I was sadly disappointed, he had left that part of the city in which
he lived when I knew him.

I put in the rest of the day gazing through the show windows, especially
of the bakeries, at the fat pies, cakes, etc., for I was getting very
hungry, my last meal being dinner the day before.

About dark I strolled up to a second-hand book store and asked how much
a bible, nearly new, would bring? The man behind the counter told me to
bring it around and he would give whatever it was worth. So I struck out
after my satchel; I hated the idea of parting with the book for it had
been presented to me by my late employer's mother Mrs. Moore, a nice
old lady who had taken a liking to me. But you know how it is when a
fellow is hungry, or would have known had you been in my shoes.

I got twenty-five cents for the bible and immediately invested fifteen
cents of it in a mince pie.

That night I stowed myself away in an empty dry goods box. I did not
sleep well, and when I did sleep it was to dream of snakes and other
venomous reptiles.

I put in the whole of the next day hunting work, but failed to find it.
I had bought a five cent ginger-cake for my dinner and now I got a five
cent pie for my supper; this broke me flat and I had nothing else that I
could sell; so I put up for the night in a pile of bailed hay, which was
stacked up behind a store.

The next morning I struck out again hunting work, but this time on an
empty stomach. About two o'clock in the afternoon I found a hack driver
who said he wanted to hire a boy to take care of his horses; he said he
would not be going home until about one o'clock that night and for me to
wait for him in front of the Court house on Fourth street.

Just as soon as dark came, I went to the appointed place and staid there
for fear my man would conclude to go home earlier than he expected. I
was exceedingly happy when the long-looked for hour drew near, for I
thought it wouldn't be long until I would have a good square meal and a
warm bed to sleep in.

About two o'clock, while leaning against a lamppost gazing up and down
Fourth street, a policeman punched me in the ribs and told me to "hunt
my hole" and that if he caught me out again so late at night he would
put me in the cooler.

I pulled out across the street and waited until he got out of sight,
then I went back to my same old stand, thinking that my man would
certainly be along in a few moments at the outside. Every hack that
drove by would cause me to have a spell of the blues, until another hove
in sight--soon to disappear again. Finally about three o'clock my
courage and what few sparks of hopes that still remained, wilted, for,
an empty stomach and sitting up so late had given me a terrible
headache, which was almost past endurance.

I was sitting on the edge of the sidewalk, with my face buried in both
hands, crying, when someone touched me on the shoulder. I was scared at
first for I thought it was a "peeler;" but my fears vanished when I
looked up into the gleaming countenance of a small, red complexioned
man, who said in a pleasant tone:--"Is there anything I can do for you
my little man?"

His kindness proved too much for me, I burst out crying and it was quite
awhile before I could tell him my trouble. He was terribly mad when I
told him how the hack man had served me; he told me to watch for the
hard-hearted wretch next day and if I saw him to point him out and he
would teach him how to play jokes on innocent children.

He took me to his boarding place, a fancy restaurant, right across the
street; he said he was just fixing to go to bed when he spied me across
the street, acting as though in trouble.

When he found out that I hadn't had a square meal for three days he
remarked that it was a d--d shame and then told the night clerk, who
appeared to be half asleep, to have me a good supper fixed up and to
give me a good room. He then bid me good night and started to bed,
telling me to remain there until I found work, if it was a month, that
he would arrange everything with the proprietor in the morning before
he went to work. I thanked him with tears in my eyes, for his kindness.

I was so tired and sleepy that I never woke up until nearly noon next
day. After eating breakfast, I struck out to hunt a job, but failed as
usual.

Three days after, while out hunting work, I stopped an old man and asked
him if he knew where I could find a job? He smiled and said: "My boy
this is the fourth time you have asked me that same question in the last
three days. You must like my looks, for I have noticed you pass scores
of men without stopping them."

I told him I never tackled a man unless he had a pleasing countenance,
for I had been snapped up short by so many; I also told him that I did
not remember asking him before.

He finally, after asking me a few questions, said: "Follow me and I will
find you work before I stop."

The first place we went into was the Planters' House, on Fourth street,
between Pine and Chestnut, and he asked the clerk if they needed a bell
boy. "No," was the short answer he received.

He then asked where he could find the proprietor. "Up in his room,
No.--. on first floor," was the answer.

We found the "boss" busily writing. My new friend plead my case like a
dutch uncle and told him if I didn't prove to be just what he
recommended me to be--a wide-awake, get-up-and-get, honest boy, that he
would pay all damages, etc.

That seemed to settle it, for I was told to go down to the office and
wait for orders.

I was too happy to live. I thanked the kind old gentleman from the
bottom of my heart and offered to pay him for his trouble as soon as I
earned some money. He told me I could pay him for his trouble by being a
good boy.

After waiting a few minutes in the office, the proprietor came down and
made a bargain with me. My wages were to be ten dollars a month. He gave
me one month's wages in advance, to buy clean clothes with.

I was put on the forenoon watch which went on duty at eight in the
morning and came off at one in the afternoon. There were five of us on
at a time.

We would always make from twenty-five cents to five dollars a day while
on duty, for we hardly ever went to wait on a person but what they would
give us something in the shape of money. Gamblers generally gave us the
most; sometimes a lot of them would get together in a room to play
cards and send down to the bar after their drinks and may be send a ten
or twenty dollar bill and tell the bell boy to keep the change. With
this money we used to have some gay old times taking in the city after
coming off guard.

The next fall, nearly one year after landing at the "Planters," I had a
fight with one of the bell boys, Jimmie Byron. He called me a liar and I
jumped aboard of him. When it was over with, the clerk, Mr. Cunningham,
called me up to the counter and slapped me without saying a word.

I went right straight to my room, packed up my "gripsack" and went to
the proprietor for a settlement.

He was surprised and wanted to know what in the world had gotten into
me.

I told him the whole thing, just as it happened. He tried to get me to
stay but I was still mad and wouldn't listen to him. I had made up my
mind to buy a pistol, come back and get square with Mr. Cunningham for
slapping me.

I left the house with eighteen dollars in my pocket; jumped aboard of a
street car and rode down to the levee. I left my valise at a saloon and
then started back to find a gun store. I finally found one and gave ten
dollars for a fancy little ivory handled five-shooter.

I then started for the "Planters" still as mad as an old setting hen. I
had not gone far when I came across a large crowd gathered around one of
those knife rackets, where you pay a quarter for five rings and try to
"ring" a knife.

I watched the thing awhile and finally invested a quarter. I got a
little "Jim Crow" barlow the first throw. That made it interesting, so I
bought another quarters worth, and another until five dollars was gone.
This did not satisfy me, so I kept on until I didn't have a nickel left.

But wasn't I mad when I realized what I had done! I forgot all about my
other troubles and felt like breaking my own head instead of
Cunningham's.

I went to the levee and found out that the "Bart Able" would start for
New Orleans in a few minutes, so I ran to get my satchel, not far off,
determined on boarding the steamer and remaining there until kicked off.
Anything to get nearer the land of my birth, I thought, even if I had to
break the rules of a gentleman in doing so.

When the Purser came around collecting fares, I laid my case before him
with tears in my eyes; I told him I was willing to work--and hard, too,
to pay my fare. He finally, after studying awhile, said, "Well go ahead,
I'll find something for you to do."

Everything went on lovely with me until one evening when we stopped at a
landing to take on some freight, mostly grain. We pulled up by the side
of an old disabled steamer which was being used for a wharf-boat and
went to work loading. The job given to me was sewing sacks when ever one
was found out of order.

There were two sets of men loading, one in the stern and the other in
the bow, and I was supposed to do the sewing at both ends. When they
came across a holey sack, if I happened to be at the other end they
would holloa for me and I would go running through the narrow passage
way, leading from one end to the other.

I was in the stern when the sound of my name came from the other end; I
grabbed my ball of twine and struck out in a dog trot through the
passage the sides of which were formed of grain piled to the ceiling.
When about half way through I thought I heard my name called from the
end I had just left; I stopped to listen and while waiting, being tired,
I went to lean over against the wall of sacked grain, but instead of a
wall there was an old vacated hatchway and over into that I went. There
being no flooring in the boat, there was nothing but the naked timbers
for my weary bones to alight upon.




CHAPTER V.

A NEW EXPERIENCE.


The next day about noon I came to my senses. I found myself all alone in
a nice little room on a soft bed. I tried to get up but it was useless;
my back felt as if it was broken. I couldn't think what had happened to
me. But finally the door opened and in stepped a doctor, who explained
the whole matter. He said the captain, just as the boat was fixing to
pull out, was walking through the passage way when he heard my groans
down in the hold and getting a lantern, ladder and help, fished me out
almost lifeless. I was in the captain's private room and having the best
of care. The back of my head was swollen out of shape, it having struck
on one of the cross timbers, while my back landed across another. The
doctor said I owed my life to the captain for finding me, "for," said
he, "if you had remained in there twenty minutes longer your case would
have been hopeless."

At last we arrived in Memphis, Tenn. We had been traveling very slowly
on account of having to stop at all the small landings and unload
freight or take on more.

After landing at Memphis I took a notion that a little walk would help
my lame back, so I struck out along the river bank, very slowly.

During my walk I came across a drove of small snipe, and having my
pistol with me, I shot at them. The pistol report attracted the
attention of two boys who were standing not far off. They came over to
me, and one of them, the oldest, who was on crutches, having only one
leg, asked how much I would take for my "shooter?" I told him I would
take ten dollars for it, as I was in need of money. He examined it
carefully and then said: "It's a trade buddy, but you will have to go up
to that little house yonder, to get the money, as I havn't got that much
with me."

The house he pointed out stood off by itself to the right of the town,
which was situated about a mile from the river. The house in question
being half a mile off, I told him that I was too weak to walk that far,
on account of my back being out of whack. "Well," said he, "you go with
us as far as that big sand hill yonder," pointing to a large red sand
hill a few hundred yards from where we stood, "and my chum here, who has
got two good legs, will run on and get the money while we wait."

I agreed, not suspecting anything wrong and when behind the sand hill,
out of sight of the steamboat landing, Mr. one-leg threw down on me with
my own "shooter" and ordered me to throw up my hands. I obeyed and held
mighty still while the other young ruffian went through my pockets. They
walked off with everything I had in my pockets, even took my valise key.
I felt considerably relieved, I can assure you, when the cocked revolver
was taken down from within a few inches of my nose. I was in dread for
fear his trembling finger might accidently touch the trigger.

As soon as I was released I went right back to the landing and notified
a policeman who struck out after them. But whether he caught them or not
I never knew, as the "Bart Able" steamed down the river shortly
afterwards.

The same evening after arriving in New Orleans the "Bart Able" pulled
back, for Saint Louis, leaving me there flat broke and among strangers.

I looked terribly blue late that evening as I walked up and down the
crowded levee studying what to do. I had already been to the Morgan
steamship landing and begged for a chance to work my way to Texas, but
met with poor success. I could not hire out even if I had applied and
got a job, for my back was still stiff, so much so that I couldn't stoop
down without terrible pain.

That night I laid down under an old tarpaulin which was spread over a
lot of sugar.

After getting up and shaking the dust off next morning, I went down the
river about a mile where scores of small boats were being unloaded.

Among them were several boat loads of oranges, bananas, etc., which were
being unloaded. In carrying the bananas on shore the over ripe ones
would drop off. On those I made my breakfast, but I wished a thousand
times before night that I had not eaten them, for Oh Lord, how my head
did ache!

That night I went to sleep on a pile of cotton bales--that is I tried to
sleep, but my headache was terrible, I could get but little repose.

The next morning I found there was a Morgan steamship in from Texas, and
I struck out to interview the captain in regard to a free ride to
Texas. But the old pot-bellied sinner wouldn't talk to me.

In the afternoon I began to grow weak from hunger and my back ached
badly. I sat down on an old stove at the foot of Canal street and never
moved for three long hours.

Finally a well dressed old man about fifty years of age, with an
umbrella over his head, came out of Couens' office, a small building a
short distance from where I sat, and walking up to me said, in a gruff
voice, "young man what are you sitting out here in the sun for, so
upright and stiff, as if nailed to that old stove?"

I told him I was compelled to sit upright on account of a lame back. In
fact I laid my case before him in full. He then said in a much more
pleasant voice: "My boy I'm going to make you an offer, and you can take
it or let it alone--just as you like. I will give you four dollars a
month to help my wife around the house and at the end of four months
will give you a free pass to Texas. You see I am agent for Couens' Red
River line of boats and, therefore, can get a pass cheap."

I accepted his offer at once and thanked him with all my heart for his
kindness. Being on his way home, we boarded a Canal street car. It was
then almost sundown.

About a half hour's ride brought us within half a block of our
destination.

Walking up a pair of nicely finished steps at No. 18 Derbigny street, he
rang a bell. A negro servant whom he called "Ann," answered the call.
Everything sparkled within, for the house was furnished in grand style.
The old gentleman introduced me to his wife as a little Texas hoosier
that had strayed off from home and was about to starve.

After supper "Miss Mary," as the servants called Mrs. Myers and as I
afterwards called her showed me to the bath house and told me to give
myself an extraordinary good scrubbing.

I do not know as this improved my looks any, as I hadn't any clean
clothes to put on, my valise having been stolen during my illness coming
down the river.

The next day Miss Mary took me to a clothing house and fitted me out in
fine style. I admired all but the narrow brimmed hat and peaked toed
gaiters. I wanted a broad brimmed hat and star top boots, but she said I
would look too much like a hoosier with them on.

That evening I got a black eye. After Mr. Myers came home from his work
about four o'clock, we all went out on the front steps to breathe the
fresh air. There being a crowd of boys playing at the corner I asked Mr.
and Mrs. Myers if I could go over and watch them awhile. Both consented,
but told me not to stay long as they didn't want me to get into the
habit of mixing with the street loafers.

On arriving there all eyes were turned towards me. One fellow yelled
out, "Hello dandy, when did you arrive!" and another one remarked, "He
is a stiff cuss--aint he?"

I concluded there was nothing to be seen and turned back; just as I
turned around a yellow negro boy slipped up behind me and pulled my
hair. The white boys had put him up to it, no doubt.

I jumped aboard of him quicker than a flash and forgot all about my sore
back. It was nip and tuck for awhile--we both being about the same size,
but I finally got him down and blooded his nose in good shape. As I went
to get up he kicked me over one eye with his heavy boot. Hence the black
eye, which was swollen up in a few minutes to an enormous size.

I expected to get a scolding from Mr. and Mrs. Myers, but they both
gloried in my spunk for taking my own part. They had witnessed the whole
thing.

Somehow or another that fight took the kink out of my back for from that
time on it began to get well. I am bothered with it though, to this day,
when I take cold or do a hard day's work.




CHAPTER VI.

ADOPTED AND SENT TO SCHOOL.


Mr. and Mrs. Myers had no children and after I had been with them about
a month, they proposed to adopt me, or at least they made me promise to
stay with them until I was twenty-one years of age.

They were to send me to school until I was seventeen and then start me
in business. They also promised to give me everything they had at their
death.

So they prepared me for school right away. As I was not very far
advanced in book learning, having forgotten nearly all that Mr. Hale
taught me, they thought I had better go to Fisk's public school until I
got a start.

I had not been going to this school long when I had trouble with the
lady teacher, Miss Finnely. It happened thus: A boy sitting behind me,
struck me on the neck with a slate pencil, and when I turned around and
accused him of it he whispered, "you lie." I gave him a lick on the nose
that made him bawl like a calf.

Of course the teacher heard it and called us up to take our medicine.

She made the other boy hold out his hand first and after giving him five
raps told him to take his seat.

It was then my time, and I stuck out my hand like a little man. She gave
me five licks and was raising the rule to strike again when I jerked my
hand away, at the same time telling her that it wasn't fair to punish me
the most when the other boy caused the fuss. She insisted on giving me a
little more so finally I held out my hand and received five more licks
and still she was not satisfied; but I was and went to my seat. She told
me two or three times to come back but I would not do it, so she sent a
boy upstairs after Mr. Dyer, the gentleman who taught the large boys.

I had seen Mr. Dyer try his hand on boys, at several different times,
therefore didn't intend to let him get hold of me if I could help it.
She saw me looking towards the door, so she came over and stood between
me and it.

I heard Mr. Dyer coming down the stairs; that was enough; I flew for the
door. I remember running against something soft and knocking it over and
suppose it must have been Miss Finnely. When I got to the street I
pulled straight for home.

About a week afterwards Mr. Myers sent me to pay school, where I was
taught German, French and English. My teacher was an old gentleman who
only took a few select scholars.

Everything went on fine until the following spring, in May or June, when
I got into a fuss with one of the scholars and skipped the country.

The way it happened: One day when school let out for dinner we all,
after emptying our dinner baskets, struck out for the "green" to play
"foot and a half."

There was one boy in the crowd by the name of Stemcamp who was always
trying to pick a fuss with me. He was twice as large as I was, therefore
I tried to avoid him, but this time he called me a liar and I made for
him.

During the scuffle which followed, I got out my little pearl handled
knife, one "Miss Mary" had given me just a few days before and was
determined to use it the first opportunity.

I was down on all fours and he astride of my back putting it to me in
the face, underhanded. The only place I could get at with the knife was
his legs, so I stuck it in up to the handle, on the inside of one leg,
just below the groin and ripped down.

He jumped ten feet in the air and roared out "Holy Moses!"

As soon as I regained my feet he took to his heels, but I soon overtook
him and got another dig at his back. I thought sure I had done him up
for good this time but found out afterwards that I had done no harm,
with the exception of ripping his clothes down the back.

The next day at that time I was on my way to Saint Louis. I had stowed
myself away on board of the "Mollie Able" among the cotton bales.

The second night out we had a blow up. One of the cylinder-heads blew
out of the engine. It nearly killed the engineer and fireman, also
several other persons.

A little negro boy--who was stealing his passage--and I were sleeping on
a pile of lumber close to the engine when she went off. We both got
pretty badly scalded.

The steamer ran ashore and laid there until morning and then went the
balance of the way on one wheel. It took us just eight days from that
time to get to Saint Louis.

I remained in Saint Louis one day without food--not caring to visit the
"Planters" or any of my acquaintances--and then walked to Lebanon, Ill.,
twenty-five miles. I thought may be I might find out through some of my
Lebanon friends where mother and sister were.

It was nearly noon when I struck out on my journey and nine o'clock at
night when I arrived at my destination. I went straight to Mrs. Bell's,
where sister had worked, but failed to hear a word of mother and
sister's whereabouts.

Mrs. Bell gave me a good bed that night and next morning I struck out to
hunt a job.

After considerable tramping around I found work with one of my old
employers, a Mr. Jacobs, who lived twelve miles from town.

I only worked a short while when I began to wish I was back under "Miss
Mary's" wing. So one morning I quit and pulled for Saint Louis.

I had money enough to pay my fare to Saint Louis and I arrived there
just as the "Robert E. Lee" and "Natchez" were fixing to pull out on
their big race for New Orleans.

The "Robert E. Lee" being my favorite boat, I jumped aboard just as she
was shoving off. Of course I had to keep hidden most of the time,
especially when the captain or purser were around. I used to get my
chuck from the cook who thought I was a bully boy.

The "Natchez" would have beaten, no doubt, but she got too smart by
trying to make a cut-off through an old canal opposite Memphis and got
stuck in the mud.

The first thing after landing in New Orleans, I hunted up one of my boy
friends and found out by him how my victim was getting on. He informed
me that he was up and hobbling about on crutches. He also stated that
the poor fellow came very near losing his leg. I concluded if they did
have me arrested that Mr. Myers was able to help me out, so I braced up
and struck out for home.

Mr. and Mrs. Myers were terribly tickled over my return. They had an
awful time though getting me scrubbed up again, as I was very black and
dirty.

A few days after my return Mr. Myers went to see my same old teacher to
find out whether he would take me back or not. At first he said that no
money could induce him to be bothered with me again, but finally Mr.
Myers talked him into the notion of trying me once more.

So the next morning I shouldered my books and struck out for school to
take up my same old studies, German, French and English.




CHAPTER VII.

BACK AT LAST TO THE LONE STAR STATE.


Everything went on lovely until the coming fall, about the latter part
of November when I skipped the country for good. I will tell you how it
happened.

One afternoon a fire broke out close to the school house and as
everybody was rushing by, I became excited and wanted to go too, to see
the fun. I asked the teacher if I could go, but he refused in a gruff
voice. This did not keep me, I made a break for the door and was soon
lost among the surging mass of people.

The next heard of me was on the "rolling deep." I had boarded a Morgan
steamship and stowed myself away until the vessel was at sea, where I
knew they wouldn't land to put me ashore.

"St. Mary" was the name of the ship. She lost one of her wheel houses
and was considerably out of shape when we landed in Galveston, Texas. It
had stormed terribly during the whole trip.

During the few hours that the ship remained in Galveston, I put in my
time hunting an old uncle of mine by the name of "Nick" White, whom I
had never seen. He had been living there seventeen years, therefore I
experienced but little difficulty in finding his place; but after
finding it I didn't have courage enough to go in and make myself known.
One reason was, I thought he might think I was beholden to him, or in
other words, trying to get his sympathy. I just stood at the gate a few
minutes viewing the beautiful shrubbery, which filled the spacious yard
and went back to the boat which by that time, was just fixing to pull
out.

We arrived in Indianola one morning about sun-up. I recognized several
of my old acquaintances standing on the wharf before the ship landed;
among them was my old God-father Mr. Hagerty, who stood for me when I
was being christened by the Catholic priest.

They were all surprised to see me back. Mr. Hagerty took me home with
him and told me to content myself until I could find work.

In about a week I went to work for Mr. H. Selickson, who ran a packing
house five miles below town. He gave me fifteen dollars a month all
winter.

The first month's wages went for a fancy pistol, the next, or at least
part of it, for a pair of star topped boots and all the balance on
"monte," a mexican game. There were lots of mexicans working there and
after working hours some of them would "deal" monte while the rest of us
"bucked."

About the first of February I quit the packing house and went to
Matagorda where I was welcomed by all my old acquaintances. From there I
took a trip over to the "Settlement," on the Peninsula, to see the old
homestead. Everything looked natural; the cedar and fig trees were
covered with little red winged black birds, seemingly the same ones that
were there when I left, nearly three years before.

After a week's stay in the Settlement, I went back to Matagorda and went
to work for Mr. Joseph Yeamans, a Baptist preacher. My work was farming
and my wages part of the crop.

Mr. Yeamans' farm was a thirty acre sand patch on the Peninsula, about
forty miles above the Settlement. Our aim was to raise a big crop of
water melons and sweet potatoes, but when I left everything pointed to a
big crop of grass burrs and a very slim lay out of sweet potatoes and
water melons.

The old gentleman and I lived all alone in a little delapidated shanty
with a dirt floor. Our chuck consisted of black coffee, hard-tack and
coon or 'possum meat. We had three good coon dogs, therefore had plenty
of fresh meat such as it was.

There being plenty "Mavricks" close at hand, and being tired of coon
meat, I used to try and get the old man to let me butcher one now and
then for a change, but he thought it wicked to kill cattle not our own.

As some of you may not know what a "Mavrick" is, I will try and explain.

In early days, a man by the name of Mavrick settled on the Lavaca river
and started a cow ranch. He being a chicken-hearted old rooster,
wouldn't brand nor ear-mark any of his cattle. All his neighbors branded
theirs, therefore Mr. Mavrick claimed everything that wore long ears.

When the war broke out Mr. Mavrick had to bid adieu to wife and babies
and go far away to fight for his country's good.

When the cruel war was ended, he went home and found his cattle roaming
over a thousand hills. Everywhere he went he could see thousands upon
thousands of his long-eared cattle.

But when his neighbors and all the men in the surrounding country came
home and went to branding their five years increase, Mr. Mavrick did not
feel so rich. He made a terrible fuss about it, but it did no good, as
in a very few years his cattle wore some enterprising man's brand and he
was left out in the cold.

Hence the term "Mavrick." At first people used to say: "Yonder goes one
of Mr. Mavrick's animals!" Now they say: "Yonder goes a Mavrick!"

About the time we got our crops, sweet potatoes, melons, etc., in the
ground, I swore off farming and skipped out for town, leaving Mr.
Yeamans my share of the "crop" free _gratis_.

After arriving in Matagorda I hired out to a Mr. Tom Nie, who was over
there, from Rancho Grande, hiring some Cow Boys.

"Rancho Grande" was owned by "Shanghai" Pierce and Allen and at that
time was considered one of the largest ranches in the whole state of
Texas. To give you an idea of its size, will state, that the next year
after I went to work we branded twenty-five thousand calves--that is,
just in one season.

Altogether there were five of us started to Rancho Grande to work--all
boys about my own age; we went in a sail boat to Palacious Point, where
the firm had an outside ranch and where they were feeding a large lot of
cow ponies for spring work.

It was about the middle of April, 1871, that we all, about twenty of us,
pulled out for the headquarter ranch at the head of Tresspalacious
creek. It took us several days to make the trip as we had to brand
calves and Mavricks on the way up.

A few days after arriving at the ranch Mr. or "Old Shang" Pierce as he
was commonly called, arrived from Old Mexico with about three hundred
head of wild spanish ponies, therefore we kids had a high old time
learning the art of riding a "pitching" horse.

We put in several days at the ranch making preparations to start out on
a two months trip. Being a store there we rigged up in good shape; I
spent two or three months' wages for an outfit, spurs, etc., trying to
make myself look like a thoroughbred Cow Boy from Bitter creek.

There were three crowds of us started at the same time; one to work up
the Colorado river, the other around home and the third which was ours,
to work west in Jackson and Lavaca counties.

Our crowd consisted of fifteen men, one hundred head of ponies--mostly
wild ones--and a chuck wagon loaded down with coffee, flour, molasses
and salt. Tom Nie was our boss.




CHAPTER VIII.

LEARNING TO ROPE WILD STEERS.


Arriving on the Navadad river, we went to work gathering a herd of
"trail" beeves and also branding Mavricks at the same time. Some days we
would brand as high as three or four hundred Mavricks--none under two
years old.

After about a month's hard work we had the herd of eleven hundred ready
to turn over to Mr. Black who had bought them, delivered to him at the
Snodgrass ranch. They were all old mossy horn fellows, from seven to
twenty-seven years old.

Mr. Black was a Kansas "short horn" and he had brought his outfit of
"short horn" men and horses, to drive the herd "up the trail."

Some of the men had never seen a Texas steer, consequently they crossed
Red river into the Indian territory with nothing left but the "grub"
wagon and horses. They had lost every steer and Mr. Black landed in
Kansas flat broke.

Lots of the steers came back to their old ranges and Mr. "Shanghai" had
the fun of selling them over again, to some other greeny, may be.

"Shanghai" Pierce went to Kansas the next year and when he returned he
told of having met Mr. Black up there, working at his old
trade--blacksmithing. He said Mr. Black cursed Texas shamefully and
swore that he never would, even if he should live to be as old as Isaac,
son of Jacob, dabble in long horns again.

After getting rid of Mr. Black's herd we turned our whole attention to
branding Mavricks.

About the first of August we went back to the ranch and found that it
had changed hands in our absence. "Shanghai" Pierce and his brother
Jonathan had sold out their interests to Allen, Pool & Co. for the snug
little sum of one hundred and ten thousand dollars.

That shows what could be done in those days, with no capital, but lots
of cheek and a branding iron. The two Pierce's had come out there from
Yankeedom a few years before poorer than skimmed milk.

Everything had taken a change--even to the ranch. It had been moved down
the river four miles to Mr. John Moore's place. Mr. Moore had been
appointed "big chief," hence the ranch being moved to his place.

About the middle of August we pulled out again with a fresh supply of
horses, six to the man and a bran new boss, Mr. Wiley Kuykendall.

Some of the boys hated to part with Mr. Nie, but I was glad of the
change, for he wouldn't allow me to rope large steers nor fight when I
got on the war-path. I remember one time he gave me fits for laying a
negro out with a four-year old club; and another time he laid me out
with his open hand for trying to carve one of the boys up with a butcher
knife.

We commenced work about the first of September on "Big Sandy" in Lavaca
county, a place noted for wild "brush" cattle. Very few people lived in
that section, hence so many wild unbranded cattle.

To illustrate the class of people who lived on Big Sandy, will relate a
little picnic a negro and I had a few days after our arrival there.

While herding a bunch of cattle, gathered the day before, on a small
prairie, we noticed a footman emerge from the thick timber on the
opposite side from where we were and make straight for a spotted pony
that was "hobbled" and grazing out in the open space.

He was indeed a rough looking customer, being half naked. He had nothing
on his head but a thick mat of almost gray hair; and his feet and legs
were bare.

We concluded to "rope" him and take him to camp, so taking down our
ropes and putting spurs to our tired horses we struck out.

He saw us coming and only being about a hundred yards from the spotted
pony, he ran to him and cutting the "hobbles," which held his two front
legs together, jumped aboard of him and was off in the direction he had
just come, like a flash. The pony must have been well trained for he had
nothing to guide him with.

A four hundred yard race for dear life brought him to the "brush"--that
is timber, thickly covered with an underbrush of live-oak "runners." He
shot out of sight like an arrow. He was not a minute too soon, for we
were right at his heels.

We gave up the chase after losing sight of him, for we couldn't handle
our ropes in the "brush."

The next day the camp was located close to the spot where he disappeared
at, and several of us followed up his trail. We found him and his three
grown daughters, his wife having died a short while before, occupying a
little one room log shanty in a lonely spot about two miles from the
little prairie in which we first saw him. The whole outfit were tough
looking citizens. The girls had never seen a town, so they said. They
had about two acres in cultivation and from that they made their living.
Their nearest neighbor was a Mr. Penny, who lived ten miles west and the
nearest town was Columbus, on the Colorado river, fifty miles east.

As the cattle remained hidden out in the "brush" during the day-time,
only venturing out on the small prairies at night, we had to do most of
our work early in the morning, commencing an hour or two before
daylight. As you might wish to know exactly how we did, will try and
explain:--About two hours before daylight the cook would holloa "chuck,"
and then Mr. Wiley would go around and yell "breakfast, boys; d----n you
get up!" two or three times in our ears.

Breakfast being over we would saddle up our ponies, which had been
staked out the night before, and strike out for a certain prairie may be
three or four miles off--that is all but two or three men, just enough
to bring the herd, previously gathered, on as soon as it became light
enough to see.

Arriving at the edge of the prairie we would dismount and wait for
daylight.

At the first peep of day the cattle, which would be out in the prairie,
quite a distance from the timber, would all turn their heads and
commence grazing at a lively rate towards the nearest point of timber.
Then we would ride around through the brush, so as not to be seen, until
we got to the point of timber that they were steering for.

When it became light enough to see good, we would ride out, rope in
hand, to meet them and apt as not one of the old-timers, may be a
fifteen or twenty-year old steer, which were continuously on the
lookout, would spy us before we got twenty yards from the timber. Then
the fun would begin--the whole bunch, may be a thousand head, would
stampede and come right towards us. They never were known to run in the
opposite direction from the nearest point of timber. But with cattle
raised on the prairies, it's the reverse, they will always leave the
timber.

After coming in contact, every man would rope and tie down one of the
finest animals in the bunch. Once in awhile some fellow would get more
beef than he could manage; under those circumstances he would have to
worry along until some other fellow got through with his job and came to
his rescue.

If there was another prairie close by we would go to it and tie down a
few more, but we would have to get there before sunup or they would all
be in the brush. It was their habit to graze out into the little
prairies at night-fall and go back to the brush by sunrise next morning.

Finally the herd which we had gathered before and which was already
"broke in," would arrive from camp, where we had been night-herding them
and then we would drive it around to each one of the tied-down animals,
letting him up so he couldn't help from running right into the herd,
where he would generally stay contented. Once in awhile though, we would
strike an old steer that couldn't be made to stay in the herd. Just as
soon as he was untied and let up he would go right through the herd and
strike for the brush, fighting his way. Under those circumstances we
would have to sew up their eyes with a needle and thread. That would
bring them to their milk, as they couldn't see the timber.

I got into several scrapes on this trip, by being a new hand at the
business. One time I was going at full speed and threw my rope onto a
steer just as he got to the edge of the timber; I couldn't stop my horse
in time, therefore the steer went on one side of a tree and my horse on
the other and the consequence was, my rope being tied hard and fast to
the saddle-horn, we all landed up against the tree in a heap.

At another time, on the same day, I roped a large animal and got my
horse jerked over backwards on top of me and in the horse getting up he
got me all wound up in the rope, so that I couldn't free myself until
relieved by "Jack" a negro man who was near at hand. I was certainly in
a ticklish predicament that time; the pony was wild and there I hung
fast to his side with my head down while the steer, which was still
fastened to the rope, was making every effort to gore us.

Just before Christmas Moore selected our outfit to do the shipping at
Palacious Point, where a Morgan steamship landed twice a week to take on
cattle for the New Orleans market.

We used to ship about five hundred head at each shipping. After getting
rid of one bunch we would strike right back, to meet one of the
gathering outfits, after another herd. There were three different
outfits to do the gathering for us.

We kept that up all winter and had a tough time of it, too, as it
happened to be an unusually cold and wet winter.

Towards spring the cattle began to get terribly poor, so that during the
cold nights while night-herding them a great many would get down in the
mud and freeze to death. Have seen as high as fifty head of dead ones
scattered over the ground where the herd had drifted during the night.
It's a pity if such nights as those didn't try our nerves.

Sometimes it would be twelve o'clock at night before we would get the
cattle loaded aboard of the ship. But when we did get through we would
surely have a picnic--filling up on Mr. Geo. Burkheart's red eye. Mr.
Burkheart kept a store at the "Point" well filled with Cow Boys
delight--in fact he made a specialty of the stuff.

Our camping ground was three miles from the Point, and some mornings the
cook would get up and find several saddled horses standing around camp
waiting for their corn--their riders having fallen by the wayside.




CHAPTER IX.

OWNING MY FIRST CATTLE.


When spring opened, our outfit, under the leadership of Mr. Robert
Partin, Mr. Wiley having quit, struck out up the Colorado river in
Whorton and Colorado counties to brand Mavricks.

About the last of July we went to the "home" ranch, where Mr. Wiley was
put in charge of us again. We were sent right out on another trip, west,
to Jackson county.

It was on this trip that I owned my first cattle. Mr. Wiley concluded it
would look more business like if he would brand a few Mavricks for
himself instead of branding them all for Allen, Pool & Co., so he began
putting his own brand on all the finest looking ones. To keep us boys
from giving him away, he gave us a nest egg apiece--that is a few head
to draw to. My nest eggs were a couple of two-year olds, and my brand
was A. T. connected--the T. on top of the A. Of course after that I
always carried a piece of iron tied to my saddle so in case I got off
on the prairie by myself I could brand a few Mavricks for myself,
without Mr. Wiley being any the wiser of it. The way I would go about it
would be to rope and tie down one of the long-eared fellows and after
heating the straight piece of round, iron bolt, in the brush or
"cow-chip" fire, "run" my brand on his hip or ribs. He was then my
property.

Everything ran along as smooth as if on greased wheels for about two
months, when somehow or another, Mr. Moore, our big chief, heard of our
little private racket and sent for us to come home.

Mr. Wiley got the "G. B." at once and a Mr. Logan was put in his place.
Now this man Logan was a very good man but he was out of his latitude,
he should have been a second mate on a Mississippi steamboat.

I worked with Logan one trip, until we got back to the ranch and then I
settled up for the first time since going to work, nearly two years
before.

An old irishman by the name of "Hunky-dorey" Brown kept the store and
did the settling up with the men. When he settled with me he laid all
the money, in silver dollars, that I had earned since commencing work,
which amounted to a few hundred dollars, out on the counter and then
after eyeing me awhile, said: "Allen, Pool & Co. owe you three hundred
dollars," or whatever the amount was, "and you owe Allen, Pool & Co. two
hundred ninety-nine dollars and a quarter, which leaves you seventy-five
cents." He then raked all but six bits into the money drawer.

To say that I felt mortified wouldn't near express my feelings. I
thought the whole pile was mine and therefore had been figuring on the
many purchases that I intended making. My intentions were to buy a herd
of ponies and go to speculating. I had a dozen or two ponies, that I
knew were for sale, already picked out in my mind. But my fond
expectations were soon trampled under foot. You see I had never kept an
account, consequently never knew how I stood with the company.

After pocketing my six bits, I mounted "Fannie" a little mare that I had
bought not long before and struck out for W. B. Grimes' ranch, a few
miles up the river. I succeeded in getting a job from the old gentleman
at fifteen dollars per month.

Mr. Grimes had a slaughter house on his ranch where he killed cattle for
their hides and tallow--the meat he threw to the hogs. About two
hundred head per day was an average killing. Did you ask kind reader,
if those were all his own cattle that he butchered? If so, will have to
say that I never tell tales out of school.

After working around the ranch a short while Mr. Grimes gave me the job
of taking care of his "stock horses," that is mares, colts and horses
that wern't in use. There were about two hundred head of those and they
were scattered in two hundred and fifty different places--over fifty
square miles of territory and of course before I could take care of them
I had to go to work and gather them up into one bunch.

A little circumstance happened shortly after going to work at the "W. B.
G." ranch which I am going to relate.

An old gentleman by the name of Kinchlow, who owned a large horse ranch
up on the Colorado river in Whorton county, came down and told Mr.
Grimes that his outfit was fixing to start on a horse "hunt" and for him
to send a man along, as there were quite a number of "W. B. G." horses
in that country.

As I had the job taking care of the horses, it fell to my lot to
accompany the old gentleman, Mr. Kinchlow, to his ranch fifty miles
distant.

It was bright and early one morning when we pulled out, aiming to ride
the fifty miles by ten o'clock that night. Mr. Kinchlow was mounted on
"old Beauregard," a large chestnut sorrel, while I rode a fiery little
bay.

Our journey was over a bald, wet prairie; night overtook us at the head
of Blue creek, still twenty miles from our destination.

A few minutes after crossing Blue creek, just about dusk, we ran across
a large panther, which jumped up out of the tall grass in front of us.
It was a savage looking beast and appeared to be on the war-path. After
jumping to one side it just sat still, growling and showing its ugly
teeth. I started to shoot it but Mr. Kinchlow begged me not to as it
would frighten his horse, who was then almost beyond control, from
seeing the panther.

We rode on and a few minutes afterwards discovered the panther sneaking
along after us through the tall grass. I begged Mr. Kinchlow to let me
kill it, but he wouldn't agree, as, he said, a pistol shot would cause
old Beauregard to jump out of his hide.

It finally became very dark; our guide was a certain bright little star.
We had forgotten all about the panther as it had been over half an hour
since we had seen it. The old man was relating an indian tale, which
made my hair almost stand on end, as I imagined that I was right in the
midst of a wild band of reds, when all at once old Beauregard gave a
tremendous loud snort and dashed straight ahead at a break-neck speed.
Mr. Kinchlow yelled "whoa," every jump; finally his voice died out and I
could hear nothing but the sound of his horse's hoofs, and finally the
sound of them too, died out.

Of course I socked spurs to my pony and tried to keep up, for I imagined
there were a thousand and one indians and panthers right at my heels.

After running about a quarter of a mile I heard something like a faint,
human groan, off to my right about fifty yards. I stopped and listened,
but could not hear anything more, except now and then the lonely howl of
a coyote off in the distance. I finally began to feel lonesome, so I put
spurs to my pony again. But I hadn't gone only a few jumps when I
checked up and argued with myself thusly:--Now suppose that groan came
from the lips of Mr. Kinchlow, who may-be fell from his horse and is
badly hurt; then wouldn't it be a shame to run off and leave him there
to die when may be a little aid from me would save him?

I finally spunked up and drawing my pistol started in the direction from
whence came the groan. My idea in drawing the pistol was, for fear the
panther, who I felt satisfied had been the cause of the whole trouble,
might tackle me. Suffice it to say that I found the old gentleman
stretched out on the ground apparently lifeless and that a half hour's
nursing brought him to. He finally after several trials, got so he could
stand up, with my aid. I then helped him into my saddle, while I rode
behind and held him on and we continued our journey both on one horse.
He informed me after he came to his right senses, that old Beauregard
had fallen and rolled over him.

We landed at our destination about ten o'clock next morning; but the
good old man only lived about two weeks afterwards. He died from the
effects of the fall, so I heard.

About Christmas I quit Mr. Grimes and went to work on my own hook,
skinning "dead" cattle and adding to the nest egg Mr. Wiley gave me. I
put my own brand on quite a number of Mavricks while taking care of Mr.
Grimes' horses, which began to make me feel like a young cattle king.
The only trouble was they were scattered over too much wild territory
and mixed up with so many other cattle. When a fellow branded a Mavrick
in those days it was a question whether he would ever see or realize a
nickel for it. For just think, one, or even a hundred head mixed up with
over a million of cattle, and those million head scattered over a
territory one hundred miles square and continually drifting around from
one place to another.

After leaving Daddy Grimes I made my home at Mr. Horace Yeamans', an old
mexican war veteran, who lived five miles from Grimes'. His family
consisted of two daughters and two sons, all grown but the youngest
daughter, Sally, who was only fourteen, and who I was casting sheeps
eyes at. The old gentleman had brought his children up very pious, which
was a glorious thing for me as, during the two years that I made my home
there, I got broke of swearing--a dirty, mean habit which had fastened
itself upon me, and which I thought was impossible to get rid of. I had
become so that it was almost an impossibility for me to utter a sentence
without using an oath to introduce it and another to end it. To show how
the habit was fastened upon me: Mr. Parten, one of my former bosses,
made me an offer of three dollars more wages, on the month, if I would
quit cursing but I wouldn't do it.

Horace Yeamans, who was about my own age and I went into partnership in
the skinning business. Cattle died by the thousands that winter, on
account of the country being overstocked, therefore Horace and I had a
regular picnic skinning, and branding Mavricks--only those that looked
as if they might pull through the winter.

To give you an idea how badly cattle died that winter will state that,
at times, right after a sleet, a man could walk on dead animals for
miles without stepping on the ground. This, of course, would be along
the Bay shore, where they would pile up on top of one another, not being
able to go further, on account of the water.

About five miles east of Mr. Yeamans' was a slough or creek called
"Turtle bayou" which lay east and west a distance of several miles, and
which I have seen bridged over with dead cattle, from one end to the
other. You see the solid mass of half starved animals, in drifting ahead
of a severe "Norther," would undertake to cross the bayou, which was
very boggy and consequently the weakest ones would form a bridge for the
others to cross on.

My share of the first hides we shipped to Indianola amounted to one
hundred and fourteen dollars. You bet I felt rich. I never had so much
money in all my life. I went at once and bought me a twenty-seven dollar
saddle and sent mother twenty-five dollars. I had found out mother's
address, in Saint Louis, by one of my old Peninsula friends getting a
letter from sister.

Our next sale amounted to more than the first. That time Horace and I
went to Indianola with the hides for we wanted to blow in some of our
surplus wealth; we were getting too rich.

When spring opened I bought five head of horses and thought I would try
my hand at trading horses. The first trade I made, I cleared twenty-five
dollars. I gave an old mare which cost me twenty dollars, for a pony
which I sold a few days afterwards for forty-five.

Along in May I fell head over heels in love, for the first time in my
life. A pretty little fourteen year old Miss, cousin to Horace and the
girls, came over on a month's visit and when she left I was completely
rattled--couldn't think of anything but her; her beautiful image was
continually before my eyes.

Her father, who was Sheriff of Matagorda county lived on the road to
Matagorda, fifteen miles from Mr. Yeamans', therefore, during the coming
summer I went to town pretty often; to get a new brand recorded was
generally my excuse. You see, as she lived about half way between the
Yeamans' ranch and town, I could be near her two nights each trip, one
going and one returning.

I had very poor success that summer in my new enterprise, horse trading.
I was too badly "locoed" to tell a good horse from a bad one; in fact I
wasn't fit for anything, unless it would have been a Mail carrier
between "Denning's Bridge" and Matagorda.




CHAPTER X.

A START UP THE CHISHOLM TRAIL.


I put in the following winter branding Mavricks, skinning cattle and
making regular trips to Matagorda; I still remained in partnership with
Horace Yeamans in the skinning business. I made considerable money that
winter as I sold a greater number of Mavricks than ever before. But the
money did me no good as I spent it freely.

That coming spring, it being 1874, I hired to Leander Ward of Jackson
county to help gather a herd of steers for the Muckleroy Bros., who were
going to drive them to Kansas. I had also made a contract with
Muckleroy's boss, Tom Merril, to go up the trail with him, therefore I
bid my friends good-bye, not expecting to see them again until the
coming fall. My wages were thirty-five dollars per month and all
expenses, including railroad fare back home.

After a month's hard work we had the eleven hundred head of wild and
woolly steers ready to turn over to the Muckleroy outfit at Thirteen
mile point on the Mustang, where they were camped, ready to receive
them. Their outfit consisted mostly of Kansas "short horns" which they
had brought back with them the year before.

It was a cold, rainy evening when the cattle were counted and turned
over to Tom Merril. Henry Coats, Geo. Gifford and myself were the only
boys who were turned over with the herd--that is kept right on. We were
almost worn out standing night guard half of every night for the past
month and then starting in with a fresh outfit made it appear tough to
us.

That night it began to storm terribly. The herd began to drift early and
by midnight we were five or six miles from camp. The steers showed a
disposition to stampede but we handled them easy and sang melodious
songs which kept them quieted. But about one o'clock they stampeded in
grand shape. One of the "short horns," a long legged fellow by the name
of Saint Clair got lost from the herd and finally when he heard the
singing came dashing through the herd at full speed yelling "let 'em
slide, we'll stay with'em!" at every jump.

They did slide sure enough, but he failed to "stay with 'em." For
towards morning one of the boys came across him lying in the grass sound
asleep. When he came dashing through the herd a stampede followed; the
herd split up into a dozen different bunches--each bunch going in a
different direction. I found myself all alone with about three hundred
of the frightened steers. Of course all I could do was to keep in front
or in the lead and try to check them up. I finally about three o'clock
got them stopped and after singing a few "lullaby" songs they all lay
down and went to snoring.

After the last steer dropped down I concluded I would take a little nap
too, so locking both legs around the saddle-horn and lying over on the
tired pony's rump, with my left arm for a pillow, while the other still
held the bridle-reins, I fell asleep. I hadn't slept long though when,
from some unaccountable reason, every steer jumped to his feet at the
same instant and was off like a flash. My pony which was sound asleep
too, I suppose, became frightened and dashed off at full speed in the
opposite direction. Of course I was also frightened and hung to the
saddle with a death grip. I was unable to raise myself up as the pony
was going so fast, therefore had to remain as I was, until after about
a mile's run I got him checked up.

Just as soon as I got over my scare I struck out in a gallop in the
direction I thought the cattle had gone, but failed to overtake them. I
landed in camp almost peetered out about nine o'clock next morning. The
rest of the boys were all there, just eating their breakfast. Tom Merril
and Henry Coats had managed to hold about half of the herd, while the
balance were scattered and mixed up with "range" cattle for twenty miles
around.

After eating our breakfast and mounting fresh horses we struck out to
gather up the lost steers. We could tell them from the range cattle by
the fresh "road" brand--a brand that had been put on a few days
before--therefore, by four o'clock that evening we had all but about one
hundred head back to camp and those Leander Ward bought back at half
price--that is he just bought the road brand or all cattle that happened
to be left behind.

On arriving at camp, we all caught fresh horses before stopping to eat
dinner or supper, whichever you like to call it, it being then nearly
night. The pony I caught was a wild one and after riding up to camp and
dismounting to eat dinner, he jerked loose from me and went a flying
with my star-spangled saddle.

I mounted a pony belonging to one of the other boys and went in hot
pursuit. I got near enough once to throw my rope over his rump and that
was all. After a run of fifteen miles I gave it up as a bad job and left
him still headed for the Rio Grande.

I got back to camp just at dark and caught a fresh horse before stopping
to eat my supper. It was still raining and had kept it up all day long.
Mr. "Jim" Muckleroy had an extra saddle along therefore I borrowed it
until I could get a chance to buy me another one.

After eating a cold supper, the rain having put the fire out, I mounted
and went on "guard," the first part of the night, until one o'clock,
being my regular time to stay with the herd, while the last "guard"
remained in camp and slept.

About ten o'clock it began to thunder and lightning, which caused the
herd to become unruly. Every time a keen clash of thunder would come the
herd would stampede and run for a mile or two before we could get them
to stop. It continued in that way all night so that we lost another
night's rest; but we managed to "stay with 'em" this time; didn't even
loose a steer.

That morning we struck out on the trail for Kansas. Everything went on
smoothly with the exception of a stampede now and then and a fuss with
Jim Muckleroy, who was a regular old sore-head. Charlie, his brother was
a white man. Where the trouble began, he wanted Coats and I, we being
the only ones in the crowd who could ride wild horses--or at least who
were willing to do so, to do the wild horse riding for nothing. We
finally bolted and told him that we wouldn't ride another wild horse
except our regular "mount," unless he gave us extra pay. You see he
expected us to ride a horse a few times until he began to get docile and
then turn him over to one of his muley pets while we caught up a fresh
one.

At High Hill in Fayette county I got the bounce from old Jim and a
little further on Coats got the same kind of a dose; while nearing the
northern state-line Geo. Gifford and Tom Merril, the boss, were fired;
so that left old Jim in full charge. He hired other men in our places.
He arrived in Wichita, Kansas with eight hundred steers, out of the
eleven hundred we started with.

After leaving the outfit I rode to the Sunset railroad at Shusenburg and
boarded a train for Columbus on the Colorado river. "Pat" Muckleroy,
Charlie's son, who was about eighteen years old, quit and went with me.
His home was in Columbus and he persuaded me to accompany him and have a
good time.

On arriving in Columbus I went with Pat to his home where I remained
during my stay in that place. I found Mrs. M., Pat's mother, to be a
kind-hearted old lady, and I never shall forget the big, fat apple
cobblers she used to make; she could beat the world making them. There
were also two young Misses in the family, Nannie and Mary, who made time
pass off pleasantly with me.

It being seventy-five miles to Tresspalacious and there being no
railroad nearer than that, I had to wait for a chance to get home. I
could have bought a horse and saddle when I first struck town but after
remaining there a week I began to get light in the pocket, for it
required quite a lot of money to keep up my end with the crowd that Pat
associated with.

At last after about a three weeks stay, I struck Asa Dawdy, an old
friend from Tresspalacious. He was there with a load of stock and was
just fixing to load them on the cars to ship them to Galveston when I
ran afoul of him. He had sold his saddle and was going to put his pet
pony, one that he wouldn't sell, into a pasture until some other time
when he happened up there. So you see I was in luck, he turned the pony
over to me to ride home on.

After buying and rigging up a saddle I left town flat broke. I spent my
last dime for a glass of lemonade just before leaving. Thus ended my
first experience on the "trail."




CHAPTER XI.

BUYS A BOAT AND BECOMES A SAILOR.


A three days' ride brought me to Grimes' ranch where I hoped to strike a
job, but the old gent' informed me that he was full handed--had more men
than he really needed. But he offered me a job cutting cord wood at a
dollar a cord until there should be an opening for me, which he thought
would be when the branding outfit arrived from Jackson county where it
had gone quite a while before.

"Cutting cord wood" sounded tough to me, but I finally agreed to try it
a round or two, for I hated the idea of being "busted." Mr. Grimes was
to advance me about two weeks provisions on "tick," so I concluded I
couldn't lose anything--unless it was a few pounds of muscle and I had
grave doubts about that, for I knew my failing when it came to dabbling
in wood.

Before launching out into the wood business I borrowed a horse and
struck out to hunt up old Satan so that I could ride around and find
easy trees to cut down; I found him about thirty miles from Grimes'
ranch; he was fat and wild; I had to get help to put him in a corral and
when I mounted him he pitched like a wolf. He had forgotten that he had
ever been ridden.

The "wood camp" was three miles from the ranch in a thinly timbered
bottom. I had to camp all by myself, which made it a disagreeable job.

The first day, after locating camp, was spent in building a kind of Jim
Crow shanty out of rotten logs--was saving my muscle to cut cord wood.

Next morning bright and early I mounted Satan and rode around hunting
some easy trees--ones that I thought would cut nicely. I marked about a
dozen and went back to camp, it being noon by that time.

After dinner I lay down to take a nap until evening when it would be
cooler. About five o'clock I rolled up my sleeves and waded into a
small, sickly pin-oak tree and the way chips flew for half an hour was a
caution. I then put in the balance of the evening cording it up--that is
what I had cut. It lacked considerable of being half a cord, but I
filled in a lot of rotten chunks to make it pan out fifty cents worth.
I slept sound that night for I was tired.

Bright and early next morning I shouldered my axe and struck out to
tackle another sickly pin-oak tree. While spitting on my hands and
figuring on how many licks it would take to down the little sapling, I
spied a large coon in a neighboring live-oak. Now catching coons, you
all know by this time was a favorite passtime with me, so dropping the
axe I went for him. By the time I got part of him cooked it was noon;
and after dinner I fell asleep and dreamt happy dreams until after
sundown. After supper I went turkey hunting and killed a fat gobbler.
Thus ended my third day in a wood camp.

I became tired of the cord wood business after two weeks time. It was
too lonesome a work for a boy of my restless disposition. I mounted
Satan one morning after devouring the last speck of grub in camp and
struck out for the ranch. On my arrival there Mr. Grimes asked me how
much wood I had? I told him I thought there was enough to balance my
grub bill. He said all right, he would send a man up there with me next
morning to measure it. I finally informed him that it wasn't in shape
for measuring, with the exception of half a cord that I cut the first
day, as it was scattered over a vast territory, two or three sticks in a
place.

I suppose he balanced my grub bill as he has never presented it yet.

Just then I came across a factory hand, John Collier by name, who had a
boat for sale. He had bought it for a pleasure boat but found he
couldn't support such a useless piece of furniture. He offered it to me
for forty dollars and he had paid one hundred for it. I tried to sell
Satan so as to buy it, but no one would have him as a gift, as they said
they would have to get their lives insured before mounting him.

I wanted the boat, but how to get her I did not know. I finally studied
up a scheme: Mr. Collier wanted to buy a horse in case he sold the boat,
so I began talking horse trade. Nothing but a gentle animal would suit
he said. I then described one to him and asked how much he would take
to-boot if the pony proved to be as I represented? "Ten dollars" said
he; "she pops" continued I. So I started over to Cashe's creek to trade
Horace Yeamans out of an old crippled pony that he couldn't get rid of.
He was a nice looking horse and apparently as sound as a dollar; but on
trotting him around a short while he would become suddenly lame in both
of his front legs.

Before starting to Cashe's creek next morning Mr. Collier told me to try
and get the horse there that night as, in case we made the trade, he and
Mr. Murphy would start next morning on a pleasure trip to Columbia, a
town forty miles east. I assured him that I would be back by dark. You
see, that was a point gained, making the trade after dark.

I succeeded in making the trade with Horace; he gave me "old gray" as he
called him and fourteen dollars in money for my interest in three
different brands of cattle. He afterwards sold the cattle for enough to
buy a whole herd of crippled ponies.

I rode back to Grimes' ranch very slowly so as not to cause old gray to
become lame.

I arrived there about sundown, but remained out in the brush until after
dark.

Mr. Collier, on being notified of my arrival, came out, lantern in hand,
bringing his friend Murphy along to do the judging for him. He confessed
that he was a very poor judge of a spanish pony, not having been long in
America. He was from "Hengland."

After examining old gray all over they both pronounced him a model of
beauty--an honor to the mustang race. You see, he was hog fat, not
having been used for so long.

The trade was sealed that night and next morning Mr. Collier and Murphy,
who already had a pony of his own, started on their forty mile journey.
When within five miles of Elliott's ferry on the Colorado river, which
was fifteen miles from Grimes' old gray gave out entirely, so that poor
Collier had to hoof it to the ferry where he secured another horse.

Now kind reader you no doubt think that a shabby trick. If so, all I can
say is "such is life in the far west."

Now that I was owner of a ship I concluded it policy to have a partner
for company if nothing more, so I persuaded a young factory hand by the
name of Sheiseinhamer or some such name to go in with me in my new
enterprise. He only had ten dollars to invest, therefore I held the
controlling interest.

Our ship was schooner-rigged and would carry about three tons. Her name
was "Great Eastern" but we changed it to "The Blood Hound."

I turned Satan loose to rustle for himself (I afterwards sold him to a
_stranger_ for thirty dollars) and then pulled down the river for
Matagorda Bay, a distance of fifteen miles.

I concluded to go to the Peninsula and buy a load of melons that trip,
as there were none on Tresspalacious.

We struck the Bay just at dark; the water was terribly rough and the
wind was so strong that it made the Blood Hound dip water and slide
along as though it was fun. My young pard, who had never been on salt
water before, having been raised in Saint Louis, turned pale behind the
gills and wanted to turn back when the low streak of land behind us
began to grow dim. But as I owned the controlling interest in the ship,
I told him he would have to grin and bear it. He swore that would be his
last trip and it was. He sold me his interest on the way back for eight
dollars; he lost just two dollars besides his time in the speculation.

Finally we hove in sight of the light house at Salura Pass. Then we were
all right for I could tell just where to head for, although I hadn't
been on the Bay much since leaving there in '67. But I had learned it
thoroughly before then.

It was fifteen miles across the Bay to Fred Vogg's landing, where I had
concluded to land. We arrived there about midnight and next morning
walked up to Mr. Vogg's house, about half a mile for breakfast. The
whole family were glad to see me--for the first time in eight years.

I bought a load of melons delivered at the landing for five cents a
head--or piece I should have said.

The next evening we started back home, and arrived at Grimes' just as
the whistle was tooting for dinner, next day. The whole crowd of factory
hands, there being about seventy-five, made a break for the boat to fill
up on melons. The largest I sold at fifty cents and the smallest at
twenty-five. By night I had sold entirely out and started back after
another load, all by myself this time, with the exception of a dog, a
stray that I had picked up.

I bought my melons at a different place this time, from a Mr. Joe Berge
who lived a few miles above Mr. Vogg. I got them for two and a half
cents a piece, therefore made a better "speck" than before. I struck a
terrible storm on my return trip and came very near swamping.

I made my next trip to Indianola as I had four passengers to take down,
at two dollars and a half a head.

Shortly after landing in Indianola I got two passengers, one of them a
pretty young lady, Miss Ruthie Ward, to take to Sand Point in Lavaca
county, just across the Bay from Indianola.

I remained in Indianola two days "bucking" monte. I left there broke
after paying for a load of melons.




CHAPTER XII.

BACK TO MY FAVORITE OCCUPATION, THAT OF A WILD AND WOOLLY COW BOY.


When the oyster season began, I abandoned the melon trade in favor of
the former.

I would load up at one of the many oyster reefs in the Bay and take them
either to the factory or Indianola where they sold for one dollar a
barrel, in the shell.

Along in October sometime, I worked up a scheme by which I thought I
could make a stake. My scheme was to get into the Colorado river where
there were no boats and speculate among the africans that lined the
river banks on both sides just as far up as it was navigable, which was
fifty miles or more.

The worst job was to get the boat into the river, the mouth of it being
stopped up with a raft, or "drift" about eighteen miles long.

My only show was to snake her across the prairie from the head of
Willson's creek, a distance of five miles--and that I concluded to do
if it took all the oxen in Matagorda county.

As I needed a partner in my new enterprise, I managed to find one in the
person of an old irishman by the name of "Big Jack." He only had a
capital of eighteen dollars but I agreed to give him half of the
profits--which I figured on being very large. You see my intentions were
to swap for hides, pecans, etc., which I would have hauled overland to
Willson's creek and from there to Indianola by sail boat.

Our plans being laid we struck out for Indianola to buy our goods--all
kinds of articles that we thought would catch the negro's eye, including
a good supply of tanglefoot--which I am sorry to say cost me dear,
besides being the cause of smashing my little scheme into a thousand
fragments.

We finally started back from Indianola with our load of goods; and Jack
being an irishman, couldn't resist the temptation of taking a "wee drop
of the critter" every fifteen or twenty minutes. The consequences were
everything but edifying.

I hired Anthony Moore, a gentleman of color to haul the Blood Hound and
all of our traps to the river.

We fixed rollers under the boat and after getting her out high and dry
on the ball prairie, found that we didn't have oxen enough to carry out
the job.

While Anthony Moore was off rustling for a couple more yoke of cattle, I
hired a horse to ride up to the Post Office after my mail, but before
starting I gave Jack a raking over for remaining drunk so long. He
hadn't drawn a sober breath since leaving town.

When I returned next evening Jack was gone--no one there but my faithful
dog, Ranger.

I found Jack had taken a negro's skiff and pulled down Willson's creek,
taking all of my snide jewelry, tobacco, etc. along. I traced him up to
where he had sold a lot of the stuff. He sold an old englishman a lot of
tobacco for seven dollars that didn't cost less than twenty. Being
discouraged I sold the Blood Hound to Anthony Moore for twenty-five
dollars, right where she lay, on the open prairie.

I then hired to Wiley Kuykendall, who was buying and shipping beeves at
Houston, at twenty-five dollars per month. I left my companion, Ranger,
with Anthony, paying him two dollars and a half a month for his board.
But poor dog he met a sad fate the next winter during one of my rash
moments.

I was out after a wild bunch of horses one day and while trying to slip
up on them unobserved Ranger and three others belonging to a neighbor
made a break after a little calf that jumped up out of the tall grass,
which of course scared the horses. I wanted to run after them as that
was my best and only chance, but I hated to go off and let the dogs kill
the poor little calf which they all four had hold of by that time.

I finally galloped back and yelled myself hoarse trying to get them off;
but no use, so drawing my pistol I began firing right and left.

When the smoke cleared away I discovered two of the dogs lifeless and
poor Ranger crawling up towards me howling with pain. He was shot
through both shoulders. No, no! I didn't feel bad; it was some other
youngster about my size. I dismounted and caressed the poor dumb brute,
with tears in my eyes. It was ten miles to camp or the nearest ranch,
therefore I had no alternative but to kill him--or leave him there to
suffer and finally die. I had tried to lift him on my horse so as to
take him to camp and try and doctor him up, but he was too heavy--being
a large, powerful brute.

I made several attempts to kill him, but every time I would raise the
pistol to shoot he would look up into my eyes so pitifully as much as to
say please don't kill me. I at last mounted my horse and after starting
off wheeled around in my saddle and put a bullet between his eyes. Thus
ended the life of as faithful a dog as ever lived.

After New Year's I quit Mr. Wiley and went to work again on my own hook,
skinning cattle and branding Mavricks. I had bought me a twenty-five
dollar horse for the occasion.

I established my camp at the head of Cashe's creek, three miles above
Mr. Yeamans.' The only company I had was Ranger and I didn't have him
but a short while, as you already know.

Cattle died pretty badly that winter and therefore I made quite a pile
of money, besides branding a great many Mavricks.

About the middle of April I met with a painful and almost fatal
accident--got shot through the knee with one of those old time dragoon
pistols, which carry a very large ball.

The bullet entered the top of my knee and came out--or at least was cut
out--on the opposite side; went right through the knee-cap. The doctor
who waited on me said I would be a cripple for life, but he missed his
guess, although I have received another bullet hole through the same
knee since then.

After getting wounded I remained at Mr. Yeamans' awhile and then went
down to Mr. Morris' on Tresspalacious Bay to board.

When I got so that I could move around on crutches I went up to Mr. John
Pierce's ranch to live. Mr. Pierce had persuaded me to put in my time
going to school while unable to work. He gave me my board and washing
free and all I had to do was to take care of the "children," little
Johnny Pierce, eight years old, Mamie Pierce, "Shang's" only child,
twelve years old and a Miss Fannie Elliott, sweet sixteen. The school
house being two miles off, we had to ride on horseback.

I would have had a soft time of it all summer, but before two weeks
rolled around I had a fuss with the red complexioned school master. I
then mounted "Boney-part" and struck out for Houston, ninety miles east.

I arrived in Houston during the State Fair. Everything was lively
there--in fact too lively for me. The first thing I did was to strike a
monte game and the second thing was lose nearly all the money I had.

After quitting the monte game I struck out to hunt aunt "Mary" whom I
heard had moved to Houston from Galveston. I had never seen her that I
remembered of, but held her in high esteem for her kindness in sending
me the white canvas breeches during the war.

I found her after hunting all day; she kept a private boarding house
close to the Union depot. She appeared to be glad to see me.

The next day aunt Mary's husband, Mr. James McClain, took me out to the
Fair ground to see the sights. The biggest sight to me was Jeff. Davis,
although I was deceived as to his makeup; I expected to see a portly
looking man on a gray horse.

May be the following song that I used to sing during the war had
something to do with that, for it ran thus:

    Jeff Davis is our President,
    And Lincoln is a fool,
    Jeff Davis rides a big gray horse
    While Lincoln rides a mule.




CHAPTER XIII.

MOTHER AND I MEET AT LAST.


After spending a week with aunt Mary, I grew restless and pulled for
Galveston to visit my uncle "Nick." I went by way of steamboat down
Buffalo bayou, leaving my horse and saddle in Houston.

I landed in the "Island City" one evening about dark. The first man I
met, I inquired of him, if he knew where Mr. Nicholas White lived? "Why
of course," was his quick answer, "I have known him for seventeen
years." He then gave me the directions how to find him.

His wife, whom he had just married a short while before, she being his
second wife, met me at the door and escorted me to the bed room where I
found the old fellow three sheets in the wind. He soon braced up though
and tendered me a hearty welcome.

The next day he spent in showing me around the city and introducing me
to his friends as his little nephew who had to "skip" from western Texas
for stealing cattle. I remember there were several high toned officials
among the ones he introduced me to; one of them I think was Tom
Ochiltree--a red-headed Congressman or Senator, I forget which.

The old gentleman had a horse and buggy, consequently I had a regular
picnic, during my stay, driving up and down the beach watching the
pretty girls go in bathing.

I remained there two weeks and on taking my departure uncle "Nick"
presented me with a Spencer Carbine--one he had captured from a yankee
while out scouting during the war. I was very proud of the gift for I
had never owned a repeating rifle before.

I landed in Houston flat broke, but wasn't long in making a raise of ten
dollars from aunt Mary. Boney-part had been taken good care of during my
absence, which made him feel too rollicky--he tried to pitch me off when
I got on him.

After bidding aunt Mary and uncle "Jim" good-bye I struck out for Allen,
Pool & Co.'s ranch on Simms' bayou. There I hired to a Mr. Joe Davis of
Clear creek, who had the contract furnishing beef to the Gulf, Colorado
and Santa Fe R. R. which was just building out from Galveston.

About the first of September I mounted Ranger, a pony I swapped
Boney-part for and lit out for Tresspalacious. My wound by that time was
about well.

On arriving at Mr. "Tom" Kuykendall's at the head of Tresspalacious
river, I learned that mother was at Mr. Morris', at the mouth of Cashe's
creek, waiting for me. She had arrived there just a few days after my
departure--for parts unknown, as no one knew where I was going.

You see after getting shot I wrote to mother telling her of the accident
and also sending her some money, as I was in the habit of doing when
flush. Hence, like a kind mother, she came out to be of service to me,
but arrived too late.

It is needless to say we were glad to meet, for the first time in
several long years.

I went right to work trying to rig up a home for her. She had brought
some money with her and I sold a lot of Mavricks--some of those I
branded the winter previous--for two dollars a head, therefore we both
together had money enough to build and furnish a shanty.

As Mr. Morris was just going to Indianola in his schooner we sent by him
after our lumber, etc. But before he got there the "big" storm, which
swept nearly every soul from the Peninsula and nearly wiped Indianola
out of existence, struck him and scattered his boat, money and
everything he had aboard to the four winds of Heaven. He and his son
"Tom" barely escaped with their own lives.

Mother and I experienced a share of the same storm too; we were still at
Mr. Morris.' The storm came about ten o'clock at night and blew the
Morris mansion down, leaving us, Mrs. Morris, her three children and a
step-son, "Jim," mother and myself to paddle around in water up to our
waists until morning.

When daylight came the Bay shore was lined with dead cattle just as far
as the eye could reach; cattle that had blown into the water and
drowned.

When Mr. Morris got back he started a new ranch up at the head of
Cashe's creek, where I had camped the winter before and I built mother a
shanty a few hundred yards from his, so she wouldn't get lonesome while
I was away.

I built it out of an old torn down house that I bought from Mr. John
Pierce on "tick" for I was then financially "busted."

Cattle didn't die very badly that coming winter, therefore I did not
make much money. But towards spring I got my work in branding Mavricks.
Some days I would brand as high as fifteen or twenty head.

That spring there was a law passed prohibiting the carrying of pistols
and I was the first man to break the law, for which they socked a
heavier fine to me than I was able to pay; but I found a good friend in
the person of Mr. John Pierce who loaned me the desired amount without
asking for it.

The first of April I hired to W. B. Grimes to go "up the trail" at
thirty dollars per month. I bade mother good bye, promising to return,
sure, that coming fall.

Our outfit consisted of twenty-five hundred head of old mossy-horn
steers, a cook and twenty-five riders, including the boss, Asa Dawdy,
with six head of good horses to the man.

Everything went on lovely with the exception of swimming swollen
streams, fighting now and then among ourselves and a stampede every
stormy night, until we arrived on the Canadian river in the Indian
territory; there we had a little indian scare. When within a few miles
of the river, Dawdy went on ahead to look up a good crossing; it wasn't
long until we discovered a terrible dust on the trail between us and the
river; it looked like it might be a cyclone coming, but instead of that
it was our boss returning. He galloped up almost out of wind telling us
to stop the herd and make preparations for war, as the woods along the
river were covered with indians on the war path.

After getting everything in shape for war, he selected two of his best
armed men, which happened to be Otto Draub and myself, to go back with
him and try to make peace with the red devils. We scoured the woods out
thoroughly, but only succeeded in finding one old, blind "buck." Asa
had, no doubt, seen him and imagined the rest. From that time on though
we were among indians all the time; and they used to try and scare Asa
into giving them "wo-ha's," (cattle) but he wasn't one of the scaring
kind--except when taken by surprise.

Everything went on smoothly again until we arrived at "Salt Fork" close
to the Kansas line. It was raining and storming terribly when we hove in
sight of the above named river. Asa went on ahead with the wagons--we
having an extra one along then to haul wood and water in--to find a
crossing, but on arriving there he found it very high, almost swimming;
he succeeded in getting both wagons over though. He then galloped back
to hurry the herd up.

We were just about a mile from the river when he came dashing up saying:
"Whoop 'em up boys! for she's rising a foot every second."

When we got there she was "bank full" and still rising. It was at least
half a mile to the opposite side and drift wood was coming down at a
terrible rate, which made it dangerous to cross. But the wagons being
over made it a ground hog case--or at least we thought so.

The old lead steers went right into the foaming water without a bit of
trouble and of course the balance followed.

Henry Coats was in the lead of the herd, Asa Dawdy and Otto Draub on the
left point, while negro "Gabe" and I kept them from turning to the
right.

We were all--that is we fellows on the points--out in swimming water
when Henry Coats' horse went under, which scared the leaders, causing
the whole herd to turn back amidst terrible confusion. Coats came very
near drowning. We worked for half an hour or more trying to get the
herd to take water again, but failed. The river continued to rise until
she was over a mile wide.

Suffice it to say, we remained there seven days without anything to eat
except fresh meat without salt. It rained during the whole time nearly,
so that we didn't get much sleep on account of having to stay with the
cattle night and day.

The first grub we got was from a lot of soldiers camped on the opposite
side of the wicked little stream "Wild Horse." They were waiting for it
to go down so they could proceed to Wichita, Kansas, their destination.

The boss, Dawdy, a fellow by the name of Hastings and myself found the
"blue coats" while out hunting a lot of steers lost the night before
during a severe storm. We had spied the white tents off to the southward
and pulled out for them, in a gallop.

On arriving within a few hundred yards we found out that a swift stream
of muddy water laid between us.

They were camped right on the opposite bank from where we stood. Dawdy
yelled over asking if they could spare some chuck? "Yes" was the quick
response, "If you will come over after it."

Dawdy and Hastings both looked at me, as much as to say: "Charlie it all
depends on you." I was considered an extra good swimmer.

After shedding my heaviest clothes--there being officers' wives in camp,
so that I couldn't undress altogether--I put spurs to "Yankee-doodle"
and went into her. It was at least two hundred yards across, but I made
it all O. K.

When the captain found out how long we had been without grub he ordered
the cook to bring out some cold biscuits. He brought out a large pan
full, and after I got my fists full, a lot of the soldiers took the
balance and selecting a narrow place, threw them over one by one to
Dawdy and Hastings.

After hiding a dozen or two fat Government biscuits under my belt, I
began studying up a plan by which I could get some flour and salt, also
coffee, over. At last I hit upon a plan: I got a wash-tub from the
captain's wife and filling it full of such stuff as we needed, launched
her out into the water; I swam by the side of it and landed on the
opposite side about half a mile below where I started in at. I then took
the tub back thanked our benefactors, mounted Yankee-doodle and pulled
for the other shore feeling a thousand per cent. better.

We arrived at camp about sundown and the boys went to work baking bread
by rolling the dough around a stick and holding it over the fire. Some
of them sat up all night eating, trying to make up for lost time.

The sun came out next morning for the first time in eight long days and
towards evening we made it across the river. The wagons we found at the
"Pond Creek" ranch on the Kansas line. The cooks had been having a soft
time.




CHAPTER XIV.

ON A TARE IN WICHITA, KANSAS.


On the fourth day of July, after being on the trail just three months,
we landed on the "Ninnasquaw" river, thirty miles west of Wichita,
Kansas.

Nearly all the boys, the boss included, struck out for Wichita right
away to take the train for Houston, Texas, the nearest railroad point to
their respective homes. Mr. Grimes paid their railroad fares according
to custom in those days. I concluded I would remain until fall.

Mr. Grimes had come around by rail, consequently he was on hand to
receive us. He already had several thousand steers--besides our herd--on
hand; some that he drove up the year before and others he bought around
there. He had them divided up into several different herds--about eight
hundred to the herd--and scattered out into different places, that is
each camp off by itself, from five to ten miles from any other. With
each herd or bunch would be a cook and "chuck" wagon, four riders, a
"boss" included--and five horses to the rider. During the day two men
would "herd" or watch the cattle until noon and the other two until time
to "bed" them, which would be about dark. By "bedding" we mean take them
to camp, to a certain high piece of ground suitable for a "bed ground"
where they would all lie down until morning, unless disturbed by a storm
or otherwise. The nights would be divided up into four equal parts--one
man "on" at a time, unless storming, tormented with mosquitos or
something of the kind, when every one except the cook would have to be
"out" singing to them.

The herd I came up the trail with was split into three bunches and I was
put with one of them under a man by the name of Phillups, but shortly
afterwards changed and put with a Mr. Taylor.

I spent all my extra time when not on duty, visiting a couple of New
York damsels, who lived with their parents five miles east of our camp.
They were the only young ladies in the neighborhood, the country being
very thinly settled then, therefore the boys thought I was very
"cheeky"--getting on courting terms with them so quick. One of them
finally "put a head on me"--or in grammatical words, gave me a black
eye--which chopped my visits short off; she didn't understand the Texas
way of proposing for one's hand in marriage, was what caused the fracas.
She was cleaning roasting-ears for dinner when I asked her how she would
like to jump into double harness and trot through life with me? The air
was full of flying roasting-ears for a few seconds--one of them striking
me over the left eye--and shortly afterwards a young Cow Puncher rode
into camp with one eye in a sling. You can imagine the boys giving it to
me about monkeying with civilized girls, etc.

After that I became very lonesome; had nothing to think of but my little
Texas girl--the only one on earth I loved. While sitting "on herd" in
the hot sun, or lounging around camp in the shade of the wagon--there
being no trees in that country to supply us with shade--my mind would be
on nothing but her. I finally concluded to write to her and find out
just how I stood. As often as I had been with her I had never let her
know my thoughts. She being only fourteen years of age, I thought there
was plenty time. I wrote a long letter explaining everything and then
waited patiently for an answer. I felt sure she would give me
encouragement, if nothing more.

A month passed by and still no answer. Can it be possible that she don't
think enough of me to answer my letter? thought I. "No," I would finally
decide, "she is too much of an angel to be guilty of such."

At last the supply wagon arrived from Wichita and among the mail was a
letter for me. I was on herd that forenoon and when the other boys came
out to relieve Collier and I, they told me about there being a letter in
camp for me, written by a female, judging from the fine hand-writing on
the envelope.

I was happy until I opened the letter and read a few lines. It then
dropped from my fingers and I turned deathly pale. Mr. Collier wanted to
know if some of my relations wasn't dead? Suffice it to say that the
object of my heart was married to my old playmate Billy Williams. The
letter went on to state that she had given her love to another and that
she never thought I loved her only as a friend, etc. She furthermore
went on advising me to grin and bear it, as there were just as good fish
in the sea as ever was caught etc.

I wanted some one to kill me, so concluded to go to the Black hills--as
everyone was flocking there then. Mr. Collier, the same man I traded
the crippled horse to--agreed to go with me. So we both struck out for
Wichita to settle up with daddy Grimes. Mr. Collier had a good horse of
his own and so did I; mine was a California pony that I had given
fifty-five dollars for quite awhile before. My intention was to take him
home and make a race horse of him; he was only three years old and
according to my views a "lightning striker."

After settling up, we, like other "locoed" Cow Punchers proceeded to
take in the town, and the result was, after two or three days carousing
around, we left there "busted" with the exception of a few dollars.

As we didn't have money enough to take us to the Black hills, we
concluded to pull for the Medicine river, one hundred miles west.

We arrived in Kiowa, a little one-horse town on the Medicine, about dark
one cold and disagreeable evening.

We put up at the Davis House, which was kept by a man named Davis--by
the way one of the whitest men that ever wore shoes. Collier made
arrangements that night with Mr. Davis to board us on "tick" until we
could get work. But I wouldn't agree to that.

The next morning after paying my night's lodging I had just one dollar
left and I gave that to Mr. Collier as I bade him adieu. I then headed
southwest across the hills, not having any destination in view; I wanted
to go somewhere but didn't care where. To tell the truth I was still
somewhat rattled over my recent bad luck.

That night I lay out in the brush by myself and next morning changed my
course to southeast, down a creek called Driftwood. About noon I
accidently landed in Gus Johnson's Cow camp at the forks of Driftwood
and "Little Mule" creeks.

I remained there all night and next morning when I was fixing to pull
out--God only knows where, the boss, Bill Hudson, asked me if I wouldn't
stay and work in his place until he went to Hutchison, Kansas and back?
I agreed to do so finally if he would furnish "Whisky-peat," my pony,
all the corn he could eat--over and above my wages, which were to be
twenty-five dollars a month. The outfit consisted of only about
twenty-five hundred Texas steers, a chuck wagon, cook and five riders
besides the boss.

A few days after Mr. Hudson left we experienced a terrible severe snow
storm. We had to stay with the drifting herd night and day, therefore it
went rough with us--myself especially, being from a warm climate and
only clad in common garments, while the other boys were fixed for
winter.

When Mr. Hudson came back from Hutchison he pulled up stakes and drifted
south down into the Indian territory--our camp was then on the territory
and Kansas line--in search of good winter quarters.

We located on the "Eagle Chief" river, a place where cattle had never
been held before. Cattlemen in that section of country considered it
better policy to hug the Kansas line on account of indians.

About the time we became settled in our new quarters, my month was up
and Mr. Hudson paid me twenty-five dollars, telling me to make that my
home all winter if I wished.

My "pile" now amounted to forty-five dollars, having won twenty dollars
from one of the boys, Ike Berry, on a horse race. They had a race horse
in camp called "Gray-dog," who had never been beaten, so they said, but
I and Whisky-peat done him up, to the extent of twenty dollars, in fine
shape.

I made up my mind that I would build me a "dug-out" somewhere close to
the Johnson camp and put in the winter hunting and trapping. Therefore
as Hudson was going to Kiowa, with the wagon, after a load of
provisions, etc., I went along to lay me in a supply also.

On arriving at Kiowa I found that my old "pard" Mr. Collier had struck a
job with a cattleman whose ranch was close to town. But before spring he
left for good "Hold Hengland" where a large pile of money was awaiting
him; one of his rich relations had died and willed him everything he
had. We suppose he is now putting on lots of "agony," if not dead, and
telling his green countrymen of his hair-breadth escapes on the wild
Texas plains.

We often wonder if he forgets to tell of his experience with "old gray,"
the pony I traded to him for the boat.

After sending mother twenty dollars by registered mail and laying in a
supply of corn, provisions, ammunition, etc., I pulled back to Eagle
Chief, to make war with wild animals--especially those that their hides
would bring me in some money, such as gray wolves, coyotes, wild cats,
buffaloes and bears. I left Kiowa with just three dollars in money.

The next morning after arriving in camp I took my stuff and moved down
the river about a mile to where I had already selected a spot for my
winter quarters.

I worked like a turk all day long building me a house out of dry
poles--covered with grass. In the north end I built a "sod" chimney and
in the south end, left an opening for a door. When finished it lacked
about two feet of being high enough for me to stand up straight.

It was almost dark and snowing terribly when I got it finished and a
fire burning in the low, Jim Crow fire-place. I then fed Whisky-peat
some corn and stepped out a few yards after an armful of good solid wood
for morning. On getting about half an armful of wood gathered I heard
something crackling and looking over my shoulder discovered my mansion
in flames. I got there in time to save nearly everything in the shape of
bedding, etc. Some of the grub, being next to the fire-place, was lost.
I slept at Johnson's camp that night.

The next morning I went about two miles down the river and located
another camp. This time I built a dug-out right on the bank of the
stream, in a thick bunch of timber.

I made the dug-out in a curious shape; started in at the edge of the
steep bank and dug a place six feet long, three deep and three wide,
leaving the end next to the creek open for a door. I then commenced at
the further end and dug another place same size in an opposite
direction, which formed an "L." I then dug still another place, same
size, straight out from the river which made the whole concern almost in
the shape of a "Z." In the end furthest from the stream I made a
fire-place by digging the earth away--in the shape of a regular
fire-place. And then to make a chimney I dug a round hole, with the aid
of a butcher knife, straight up as far as I could reach; then commencing
at the top and connecting the two holes. The next thing was to make it
"draw," and I did that by cutting and piling sods of dirt around the
hole, until about two feet above the level.

I then proceeded to build a roof over my 3 x 18 mansion. To do that I
cut green poles four feet long and laid them across the top, two or
three inches apart. Then a layer of grass and finally, to finish it off,
a foot of solid earth. She was then ready for business. My idea in
making it so crooked was, to keep the indians, should any happen along
at night, from seeing my fire. After getting established in my new
quarters I put out quite a number of wolf baits and next morning in
going to look at them found several dead wolves besides scores of
skunks, etc. But they were frozen too stiff to skin, therefore I left
them until a warmer day.

The next morning on crawling out to feed my horse I discovered it
snowing terribly, accompanied with a piercing cold norther. I crawled
back into my hole after making Whisky-peat as comfortable as possible
and remained there until late in the evening, when suddenly disturbed by
a horny visitor.

It was three or four o'clock in the evening, while humped up before a
blazing fire, thinking of days gone by, that all at once, before I had
time to think, a large red steer came tumbling down head first, just
missing me by a few inches. In traveling ahead of the storm the whole
Johnson herd had passed right over me, but luckily only one broke
through.

Talk about your ticklish places! That was truly one of them; a steer
jammed in between me and daylight, and a hot fire roasting me by
inches.

I tried to get up through the roof--it being only a foot above my
head--but failed. Finally the old steer made a terrible struggle, just
about the time I was fixing to turn my wicked soul over to the Lord, and
I got a glimpse of daylight under his flanks. I made a dive for it and
by tight squeezing I saved my life.

After getting out and shaking myself I made a vow that I would leave
that God-forsaken country in less than twenty-four hours; and I did so.




CHAPTER XV.

A LONELY TRIP DOWN THE CIMERON.


The next morning after the steer racket I pulled out for Kiowa, Kansas.
It was then sleeting from the north, consequently I had to face it.

About three o'clock in the evening I changed my notion and concluded to
head for Texas. So I turned east, down the Eagle Chief, to where it
emptied into the Cimeron, and thence down that stream; knowing that I
was bound to strike the Chisholm trail--the one I came up on, the spring
before.

I camped that night at the mouth of Eagle Chief, and went to roost on an
empty stomach, not having brought any grub with me. I was then in the
western edge of what is known as the Black-jack country, which extends
east far beyond the Chisholm trail.

The next morning I continued down the Cimeron, through Black-jack timber
and sand hills. To avoid the sand hills, which appeared fewer on the
opposite side, I undertook to cross the river, but bogged down in the
quicksand and had to turn back.

That night I camped between two large sand hills and made my bed in a
tall bunch of blue-stem grass. I went to bed as full as a tick, as I had
just eaten a mule-eared rabbit, one I had slipped up onto and killed
with a club. I was afraid to shoot at the large droves of deer and
turkeys, on account of the country being full of fresh indian signs.

I crawled out of my nest next morning almost frozen. I built a roaring
big fire on the _south_ edge of the bunch of tall grass so as to check
the cold piercing norther. After enjoying the warm fire a few moments, I
began to get thirsty and there being no water near at hand, I took my
tin cup and walked over to a large snow-drift a short distance off, to
get it full of clean snow, which I intended melting by the fire to
quench my burning thirst.

While filling the cup I heard a crackling noise behind me and looking
over my shoulder discovered a blaze of fire twenty feet in the air and
spreading at a terrible rate. I arrived on the scene just in time to
save Whisky-peat from a horrible death. He was tied to a tree, the top
limbs of which were already in a blaze. I also managed to save my
saddle and an old piece of saddle blanket, they being out under the tree
that Whisky-peat was tied to. I didn't mind losing my leather leggins,
saddle blankets, etc., so much as I did the old delapidated overcoat
that contained a little silver-plated match box in one of the pockets.

That day I traveled steady, but not making very rapid progress, on
account of winding around sand hills, watching for indians and going
around the heads of boggy sloughs. I was certain of striking the
Chisholm trail before night, but was doomed to disappointment.

I pitched camp about nine o'clock that night and played a single-handed
game of freeze-out until morning, not having any matches to make a fire
with.

I hadn't gone more than two miles next morning when I came across a
camp-fire, which looked as though it had been used a few hours before;
on examination I found it had been an indian camp, just vacated that
morning. The trail, which contained the tracks of forty or fifty head of
horses, led down the river. After warming myself I struck right out on
their trail, being very cautious not to run onto them. Every now and
then I would dismount and crawl to the top of a tall sand hill to see
that the road was clear ahead.

About noon I came to a large creek, which proved to be "Turkey Creek."
The reds had made a good crossing by digging the banks down and breaking
the ice.

After crossing, I hadn't gone but a short distance when I came in sight
of the Chisholm trail. I never was so glad to see anything
before--unless it was the little streak of daylight under the steer's
flanks.

The indians on striking the trail had struck south on it; and after
crossing the Cimeron I came in sight of them, about five miles ahead of
me. I rode slow so as to let them get out of sight. I didn't care to
come in contact with them for fear they might want my horse and possibly
my scalp.

About dark that evening I rode into a large camp of Government
freighters, who informed me that the fifty indians who had just
passed--being on their way back to the reservation--were Kiowas who had
been on a hunting expedition.

I fared well that night, got a good supper and a warm bed to sleep
in--besides a good square meal of corn and oats for my horse.

The next morning before starting on my journey, an old irish teamster by
the name of "Long Mike" presented me with a pair of pants--mine being
almost in rags--and a blue soldier coat, which I can assure you I
appreciated very much.

About dusk that evening, I rode into Cheyenne Agency and that night
slept in a house for the first time since leaving Kiowa--in fact I
hadn't seen a house since leaving Kiowa.

The next morning I continued south and that night put up at "Bill"
Williams' ranch on the "South Canadian" river.

Shortly after leaving the Williams ranch next morning I met a crowd of
Chickasaw indians who bantered me for a horse race. As Whisky-peat was
tired and foot-sore, I refused; but they kept after me until finally I
took them up. I put up my saddle and pistol against one of their ponies.
The pistol I kept buckled around me for fear they might try to swindle
me. The saddle I put up and rode the race bare-back. I came out ahead,
but not enough to brag about. They gave up the pony without a murmer,
but tried to persuade me to run against one of their other ponies, a
much larger and finer looking one. I rode off thanking them very kindly
for what they had already done for me.

That night I put up at a ranch on the Washita river and next morning
before leaving swapped my indian pony off for another one and got ten
dollars to-boot.

That morning I left the Chisholm trail and struck down the Washita
river, in search of a good, lively place where I might put in the
balance of the winter.

I landed in Erin Springs late that evening and found a grand ball in
full bloom at Frank Murry's mansion. The dancers were a mixed crowd, the
ladies being half-breeds and the men, mostly americans and very tough
citizens.

Of course I joined the mob, being in search of excitement and had a gay
old time drinking kill-me-quick whisky and swinging the pretty indian
maidens.

After breakfast next morning the whole crowd, ladies and all, went down
the river five miles to witness a "big" horse race at "Kickapoo" flat.

After the "big" race--which was for several thousand dollars--was over
the day was spent in running pony races and drinking whisky. By night
the whole mob were gloriously drunk, your humble servant included. There
were several fights and fusses took place during the day, but no one
seriously hurt.

It being against the laws of the United States to sell, or have whisky
in the Indian territory, you might wonder where it came from: A man by
the name of Bill Anderson--said to have been one of Quantrell's men
during the war--did the selling.

He defied the United States marshalls and it was said that he had over a
hundred indictments against him. He sold it at ten dollars a gallon,
therefore you see he could afford to run quite a risk.

The next day on my way down the river to Paul's valley I got rid of my
extra pony; I came across two apple peddlers who were on their way to
Fort Sill with a load of apples and who had had the misfortune of losing
one of their horses by death, the night before, thereby leaving them on
the prairie helpless, unable to move on. They had no money to buy
another horse with, having spent all their surplus wealth in Arkansas
for the load of apples. When I gave them the pony, they felt very happy
judging from their actions. On taking my departure one of them insisted
on my taking his silver watch as a token of friendship. I afterwards had
the watch stolen from me.

Well, patient reader, I will now drop the curtain for awhile. Just
suffice it to say I had a tough time of it during the rest of the winter
and came out carrying two bullet wounds. But I had some gay times as
well as tough and won considerable money running Whisky-peat.

The following May I landed in Gainesville, Texas, "right side up with
care" and from there went to Saint Joe on the Chisholm trail, where I
succeeded in getting a job with a passing herd belonging to Capt.
Littlefield of Gonzales. The boss' name was "Jim" Wells and the herd
contained thirty-five hundred head of stock cattle. It being a terribly
wet season we experienced considerable hardships, swimming swollen
streams, etc. We also had some trouble with indians.

We arrived in Dodge City, Kansas on the third day of July and that night
I quit and went to town to "whoop 'em up Liza Jane."

I met an old friend that night by the name of "Wess" Adams and we both
had a gay time, until towards morning when he got severely stabbed in a
free-to-all fight.

On the morning of July fifth I hired to David T. Beals--or the firm of
Bates & Beals, as the outfit was commonly called--to help drive a herd
of steers, twenty-five hundred head, to the Panhandle of Texas, where he
intended starting a new ranch.

The next morning we struck out on the "Old Fort Bascom" trail, in a
southwesterly direction.

The outfit consisted of eight men besides the boss, Bill Allen and
"Deacon" Bates, one of Mr. Beals' silent partners, who was going along
to locate the new range and O. M. Johnson, the whole-souled ex-rebel
cook. We had six extra good horses apiece, my six being named as
follows: Comanche, Allisan, Last Chance, Creeping Moses, Damfido and
Beat-and-be-damned. The last named was afterwards shot full of arrows
because he wouldn't hurry while being driven off by a band of indians
who had made a raid on the camp.




CHAPTER XVI.

MY FIRST EXPERIENCE ROPING A BUFFALO.


About the sixth day out from Dodge we crossed the Cimeron and that
evening I had a little excitement chasing a herd of buffaloes.

After crossing the river about noon, we drove out to the divide, five or
six miles and made a "dry" camp. It was my evening to lay in camp, or do
anything else I wished. Therefore concluded I would saddle my little
indian mare--one I had traded for from an indian--and take a hunt.

About the time I was nearly ready to go Mr. Bates, seeing some of the
cattle slipping off into a bunch of sand hills which were near the herd,
asked me if I wouldn't ride out and turn them back. I went, leaving my
pistol and gun in camp, thinking of course that I would be back in a few
minutes. But instead of that I didn't get back until after dinner the
next day.

Just as I was starting back to camp, after turning the cattle, a large
herd of buffaloes dashed by camp headed west. The boys all ran out with
their guns and began firing. I became excited and putting spurs to my
pony, struck out to overtake and kill a few of them, forgetting that I
didn't have anything to shoot with. As they had over a mile the start it
wasn't an easy matter to overtake them. It was about four o'clock in the
afternoon and terribly hot; which of course cut off my pony's wind and
checked her speed to a great extent.

About sundown I overtook them. Their tongues were sticking out a yard. I
took down my rope from the saddle-horn, having just missed my shooting
irons a few minutes before, and threw it onto a yearling heifer. When
the rope tightened the yearling began to bleat and its mammy broke back
out of the herd and took after me. I tried to turn the rope loose so as
to get out of the way, but couldn't, as it was drawn very tight around
the saddle-horn. To my great delight, after raking some of the surplus
hair from my pony's hind quarters, she turned and struck out after the
still fleeing herd.

Now the question arose in my mind, "how are you going to kill your
buffalo?" Break her neck was the only way I could think of; after
trying it several times by running "against" the rope at full speed, I
gave it up as a failure. I then concluded to cut the rope and let her
go, so getting out my old frog-sticker--an old pocket knife I had picked
up a few days before and which I used to clean my pipe--I went to work
trying to open the little blade it being the only one that would cut hot
butter. The big blade was open when I found it, consequently it was
nothing but a sheet of rust. The little blade had become rusted
considerably, which made it hard to open. Previous to that I always used
my bowie knife, which at that time was hanging to my pistol belt, in
camp, to open it with. After working a few minutes I gave up the notion
of opening the little blade and went to work sawing at the rope with the
big one. But I soon gave that up also, as I could have made just as much
headway by cutting with my finger. At last I dismounted and went to him,
or at least her, with nothing but my muscle for a weapon.

I finally managed to get her down by getting one hand fastened to her
under jaw and the other hold of one horn and then twisting her neck. As
some of you might wonder why I had so much trouble with this little
animal, when it is a known fact that one man by himself can tie down the
largest domestic bull that ever lived, I will say that the difference
between a buffalo and a domestic bull is, that the latter when you throw
him hard against the ground two or three times, will lie still long
enough to give you a chance to jump aboard of him, while the former will
raise to his feet, instantly, just as long as there's a bit of life
left.

After getting her tied down with my "sash," a silk concern that I kept
my breeches up with, I went to work opening the little blade of my
knife. I broke the big one off and then used it for a pry to open the
other with.

When I got her throat cut I concluded it a good idea to take the hide
along, to show the boys that I didn't have my run for nothing, so went
to work skinning, which I found to be a tedious job with such a small
knife-blade.

It was pitch dark when I started towards camp with the hide and a small
chunk of meat tied behind my saddle.

After riding east about a mile, I abandoned the idea of going to camp
and turned south facing the cool breeze in hopes of finding water, my
pony and I both being nearly dead for a drink.

It was at least twenty miles to camp over a level, dry plain, therefore
I imagined it an impossibility to go that distance without water. As the
streams all lay east and west in that country, I knew by going south I
was bound to strike one sooner or later.

About midnight I began to get sleepy, so, pulling the bridle off my pony
so she could graze, I spread the buffalo hide down, hair up, and after
wrapping the end of the rope, that my pony was fastened to around my
body once or twice so she couldn't get loose without me knowing it, fell
asleep.

I hadn't slept long when I awoke, covered from head to foot with ants.
The fresh hide had attracted them.

After freeing myself of most of the little pests I continued my journey
in search of water.

About three o'clock in the morning I lay down again, but this time left
the hide on my saddle.

I think I must have been asleep about an hour when all at once my pony
gave a tremendous snort and struck out at full speed, dragging me after
her.

You see I had wrapped the rope around my body as before and it held me
fast some way or another; I suppose by getting tangled. Luckily for me
though it came loose after dragging me about a hundred yards.

You can imagine my feelings on gaining my feet, and finding myself
standing on the broad prairie afoot. I felt just like a little boy does
when he lets a bird slip out of his hand accidently--that
is--exceedingly foolish.

The earth was still shaking and I could hear a roaring noise like that
of distant thunder. A large herd of buffaloes had just passed.

While standing scratching my head a faint noise greeted my ear; it was
my pony snorting. A tramp of about three hundred yards brought me to
her. She was shaking as though she had a chill. I mounted and continued
my journey south, determined on not stopping any more that night.

About ten o'clock next morning I struck water on the head of Sharp's
creek, a tributary to "Beaver" or head of North Canadian.

When I got to camp--it having been moved south about twenty miles from
where I left it--the boys had just eaten dinner and two of them were
fixing to go back and hunt me up, thinking some sad misfortune had
befallen me.

When we got to Blue Creek, a tributary to South Canadian, camp was
located for awhile, until a suitable location could be found for a
permanent ranch.

Mr. Bates struck out across the country to the Canadian river, taking me
along, to hunt the range--one large enough for at least fifty thousand
cattle.

After being out three days we landed in Tascosa, a little mexican town
on the Canadian. There were only two americans there, Howard &
Reinheart, who kept the only store in town. Their stock of goods
consisted of three barrels of whisky and half a dozen boxes of soda
crackers.

From there we went down the river twenty-five miles where we found a
little trading point, consisting of one store and two mexican families.
The store, which was kept by a man named Pitcher, had nothing in it but
whisky and tobacco. His customers were mostly transient buffalo hunters,
they being mostly indians and mexicans. He also made a business of
dealing in robes, furs, etc., which he shipped to Fort Lyons, Colorado,
where his partner, an officer in the United States Army lived. There
were three hundred Apache indians camped right across the river from
"Cold Springs," as Pitcher called his ranch.

A few miles below where the little store stood Mr. Bates decided on
being the center of the "L. X." range; and right there, Wheeler
post-office now stands. And that same range, which was then black with
buffaloes, is now stocked with seventy-five thousand fine blooded
cattle, and all fenced in. So you see time makes changes, even out here
in the "western wilds."




CHAPTER XVII.

AN EXCITING TRIP AFTER THIEVES.


After arriving on our newly located ranch we counted the cattle and
found the herd three hundred head short.

Bill Allen, the boss, struck back to try and find their trail. He found
it leading south from the "rifle pits." The cattle had stolen out of the
herd without anyone finding it out; and of course finding themselves
free, they having come from southern Texas, they headed south across the
Plains.

Allen came back to camp and taking me and two horses apiece, struck down
the river to head them off. We made our headquarters at Fort Elliott and
scoured the country out for a hundred miles square.

We succeeded in getting about two hundred head of them; some had become
wild and were mixed up with large herds of buffalo, while others had
been taken up by ranchmen around the Fort and the brands disfigured. We
got back to camp after being absent a month.

About the first of October four more herds arrived; three from Dodge and
one from Grenada, Colorado, where Bates & Beals formerly had a large
ranch. We then turned them all loose on the river and established "Sign"
camps around the entire range, which was about forty miles square. The
camps were stationed from twenty-five to thirty miles apart. There were
two men to the camp and their duty was to see that no cattle drifted
outside of the line--on their "ride," which was half way to the next
camp on each side, or in plainer words one man would ride south towards
the camp in that direction, while his pard would go north until he met
the man from the next camp, which would generally be on a hill, as near
half way as possible. If any cattle had crossed over the line during the
night they would leave a trail of course, and this the rider would
follow up until he overtook them. He would then bring them back inside
of the line; sometimes though they would come out so thick that half a
dozen men couldn't keep them back, for instance, during a bad storm.
Under such circumstances he would have to do the best he could until he
got a chance to send to the "home ranch" for help.

A young man by the name of John Robinson and myself were put in a Sign
camp ten miles south of the river, at the foot of the Staked Plains. It
was the worst camp in the whole business, for three different reasons,
the first one being, cattle naturally want to drift south in the winter,
and secondly, the cold storms always came from the north, and the third
and most objectionable cause was, if any happened to get over the line
onto the Staked plains during a bad snow storm they were considered
gone, as there were no "breaks" or anything to check them for quite a
distance. For instance, drifting southwest they would have nothing but a
level plain to travel over for a distance of three hundred miles to the
Pecos river near the old Mexico line.

John and I built a small stone house on the head of "Bonetta" Canyon and
had a hog killing time all by ourselves. Hunting was our delight at
first, until it became old. We always had four or five different kinds
of meat in camp. Buffalo meat was way below par with us, for we could go
a few hundred yards from camp any time of day and kill any number of the
woolly brutes. To give you an idea how thick buffaloes were around there
that fall will say, at one time when we first located our camp on the
Bonetta, there was a solid string of them, from one to three miles wide,
going south, which took three days and nights to cross the Canadian
river. And at other times I have seen them so thick on the plains that
the country would look black just as far as the eye could reach.

Late that fall we had a change in bosses. Mr. Allen went home to Corpus
Christi, Texas, and a man by the name of Moore came down from Colorado
and took his place.

About Christmas we had a little excitement, chasing some mexican
thieves, who robbed Mr. Pitcher of everything he had in his little Jim
Crow store. John and I were absent from our camp, six days on this trip.
There were nine of us in the persuing party, headed by Mr. Moore, our
boss. We caught the outfit, which consisted of five men, all well armed
and three women, two of them being pretty maidens, on the staked plains,
headed for Mexico. It was on this trip that I swore off getting drunk,
and I have stuck to it--with the exception of once and that was over the
election of President Cleveland--It happened thus:

We rode into Tascosa about an hour after dark, having been in the saddle
and on a hot trail all day without food or water. Supper being ordered
we passed off the time waiting, by sampling Howard and Reinheart's bug
juice.

Supper was called and the boys all rushed to the table--a few sheepskins
spread on the dirt floor. When about through they missed one of their
crowd--a fellow about my size. On searching far and near he was found
lying helplessly drunk under his horse, Whisky-peet--who was tied to a
rack in front of the store. A few glasses of salty water administered by
Mr. Moore brought me to my right mind. Moore then after advising me to
remain until morning, not being able to endure an all night ride as he
thought, called, "come on, fellers!" And mounting their tired horses
they dashed off at almost full speed.

There I stood leaning against the rack not feeling able to move.
Whisky-peet was rearing and prancing in his great anxiety to follow the
crowd. I finally climbed into the saddle, the pony still tied to the
rack. I had sense enough left to know that I couldn't get on him if
loose, in the fix I was in. Then pulling out my bowie knife I cut the
rope and hugged the saddle-horn with both hands. I overtook and stayed
with the crowd all night, but if ever a mortal suffered it was me. My
stomach felt as though it was filled with scorpions, wild cats and
lizards. I swore if God would forgive me for geting on that drunk I
would never do so again. But the promise was broken, as I stated before,
when I received the glorious news of Cleveland's election.

After New Year's, Moore took Jack Ryan, Vandozen and myself and went on
an exploring expedition south, across the Staked plains, with a view of
learning the country.

The first place we struck was Canyon Paladuro, head of Red river. The
whole country over there was full of indians and mexicans. We laid over
two days in one of their camps, watching them lance buffaloes. From
there we went to Mulberry where we put in three or four days hunting.
When we pulled out again our pack-pony was loaded down with fat bear
meat.




CHAPTER XVIII.

SEVEN WEEKS AMONG INDIANS.


On our arrival back to the ranch, Moore rigged up a scouting outfit to
do nothing but drift over the Plains in search of strayed cattle.

The outfit consisted of a well-filled chuck-wagon, a number one good
cook, Mr. O. M. Johnson, and three warriors, Jack Ryan, Vanduzen and
myself. We had two good horses apiece, that is, all but myself, I had
three counting Whisky-peet.

About the sixth day out we struck three thousand Comanche Indians and
became pretty badly scared up. We had camped for the night on the
plains, at the forks of Mulberry and Canyon Paladuro; a point from
whence could be seen one of the roughest and most picturesque scopes of
country in the west.

The next morning Jack Ryan went with the wagon to pilot it across
Mulberry Canyon, while "Van" and I branched off down into Canyon
Paladuro to look for cattle signs. We succeeded in finding two little
knotty-headed two-year old steers with a bunch of buffalo. They were
almost as wild as their woolly associates, but we managed to get them
cut out and headed in the direction the wagon had gone.

About noon, on turning a sharp curve in the canyon, we suddenly came in
full view of our wagon surrounded with a couple of thousand red skins,
on horse back, and others still pouring down from the hills, on the
east.

It was too late to figure on what to do, for they had already seen us,
only being about half a mile off. You see the two wild steers had turned
the curve ahead of us and attracted the indians attention in that
direction. We couldn't see anything but the white top of our wagon, on
account of the solid mass of reds, hence couldn't tell whether our boys
were still among the living or not. We thought of running once, but
finally concluded to go up and take our medicine like little men, in
case they were on the war-path. Leaving Whisky-peet, who was tied behind
the wagon, kept me from running more than anything else.

On pushing our way through the mass we found the boys, winchesters in
hand, telling the old chiefs where to find plenty of buffalo. There were
three thousand in the band, and they had just come from Ft. Sill,
Indian Territory, on a hunting expedition. They wanted to get where
buffaloes were plentiful before locating winter quarters.

From that time on we were among indians all the time. The Pawnee tribe
was the next we came in contact with. Close to the Indian Territory line
we run afoul of the whole Cheyenne tribe. They were half starved, all
the buffalo having drifted south, and their ponies being too poor and
weak to follow them up. We traded them out of lots of blankets,
trinkets, etc. For a pint of flour or coffee they would give their whole
soul--and body thrown in for good measure. We soon ran out of chuck too,
having swapped it all off to the hungry devils.

We then circled around by Ft. Elliott, and up the Canadian river to the
ranch, arriving there with eighteen head of our steers, after an absence
of seven weeks.

We only got to remain at the ranch long enough to get a new supply of
chuck, etc., and a fresh lot of horses, as Moore sent us right back to
the Plains. In a south westerly direction this time.

We remained on the Plains scouting around during the rest of the winter,
only making short trips to the ranch after fresh horses and grub. We
experienced some tough times too, especially during severe snow storms
when our only fuel, "buffalo-chips," would be covered up in the deep
snow. Even after the snow melted off, for several days afterwards, we
couldn't get much warmth out of the buffalo-chips, on account of them
being wet.

About the first of April, Moore called us in from the Plains to go up
the river to Ft. Bascom, New Mexico, on a rounding-up expedition. We
were gone on that trip over a month.

On our arrival back, Moore went right to work gathering up everything on
the range in the shape of cattle, so as to "close-herd" them during the
summer. His idea in doing that was to keep them tame. During the winter
they had become almost beyond control. The range was too large for so
few cattle. And another thing buffalo being so plentiful had a tendency
to making them wild.

About the first of June Moore put me in charge of an outfit, which
consisted of twenty-five hundred steers, a wagon and cook, four riders,
and five horses to the man or rider. He told me to drift over the Plains
wherever I felt like, just so I brought the cattle in fat by the time
cold weather set in.

It being an unusually wet summer the scores of basins, or "dry lakes,"
as we called them, contained an abundance of nice fresh water, therefore
we would make a fresh camp every few days. The grass was also fine,
being mostly buffalo-grass and nearly a foot high. If ever I enjoyed
life it was that summer. No flies or mosquitoes to bother, lots of game
and a palmy atmosphere.

Towards the latter part of July about ten thousand head of "through"
cattle arrived from southern Texas. To keep the "wintered" ones from
catching the "Texas fever," Mr. Moore put them all on the Plains,
leaving the new arrivals on the north side of the river. There was three
herds besides mine. And I was put in charge of the whole outfit, that
is, the four herds; although they were held separate as before, with the
regular number of men, horses, etc. to each herd.

I then put one of my men in charge of the herd I had been holding, and
from that time on until late in the fall I had nothing to do but ride
from one herd to the other and see how they were getting along. Some
times the camps would be twenty miles apart. I generally counted each
bunch once a week, to be certain they were all there.

About the first of October, Moore came out and picked eight hundred of
the fattest steers out of the four herds and sent them to Dodge to be
shipped to Chicago. He then took everything to the river, to be turned
loose onto the winter range until the next spring.

When the hardest work was over--winter camps established, etc., I
secured Moore's consent to let me try and overtake the shipping steers,
and accompany them to Chicago. So mounted on Whisky-peet I struck out,
accompanied by one of the boys, John Farris. It was doubtful whether we
would overtake the herd before being shipped, as they had already been
on the road about fifteen days, long enough to have gotten there.

The night after crossing the Cimeron river we had a little indian scare.
About three o'clock that afternoon we noticed two or three hundred
mounted reds, off to one side of the road, marching up a ravine in
single file. Being only a mile off, John proposed to me that we go over
and tackle them for something to eat. We were terribly hungry, as well
as thirsty.

I agreed, so we turned and rode towards them. On discovering us they all
bunched up, as though parleying. We didn't like such maneuvering, being
afraid maybe they were on the war-path, so turned and continued our
journey along the road, keeping a close watch behind for fear they might
conclude to follow us.

We arrived on Crooked Creek, where there was a store and several
ranches, just about dark. On riding up to the store, where we intended
stopping all night, we found it vacated, and everything turned up-side
down as though the occupants had just left in a terrible hurry. Hearing
some ox bells down the creek we turned in that direction, in hopes of
finding something to eat.

About a mile's ride brought us to a ranch where several yoke of oxen
stood grazing, near the door. Finding a sack of corn in a wagon we fed
our horses and then burst open the door of the log house, which was
locked. Out jumped a little playful puppy, who had been asleep, his
master having locked him up in there, no doubt, in his anxiety to pull
for Dodge.

Hanging over the still warm ashes was a pot of nice beef soup which had
never been touched. And in the old box cupboard was a lot of cold
biscuits and a jar of nice preserves, besides a jug of molasses, etc.

After filling up we struck out for Dodge, still a distance of
twenty-five miles. We arrived there a short while after sun-up next
morning; and the first man we met--an old friend by the name of
Willingham--informed us of the indian outbreak. There had been several
men killed on Crooked Creek the evening before--hence John and I finding
the ranches deserted.

On riding through the streets that morning, crowds of women, some of
them crying, seeing we were just in from the South, flocked around us
inquiring for their absent ones, fathers, brothers, lovers and sons,
some of whom had already been killed, no doubt; there having been
hundreds of men killed in the past few days.

John and I of course laughed in our boots to think that we turned back,
instead of going on to the band of blood-thirsty devils that we had
started to go to.

The first thing after putting our horses up at the livery stable, we
went to Wright & Beverly's store and deposited our "wealth." John had a
draft for one hundred and fourteen dollars, while I had about three
hundred and fifty dollars. We then shed our old clothes and crawled
into a bran new rig out and out. Erskine Clement, one of Mr. Beal's
partners, was in town waiting to ship the herd which should have been
there by that time. But he hadn't heard a word from it, since getting
Moore's letter--which, by the way, had to go around through Las Vegas,
New Mexico, and down through the southern part of Colorado--stating
about what time it would arrive in Dodge. He was terribly worried when I
informed him that John and I had neither seen nor heard anything of the
outfit since it left the ranch.

That night about ten o'clock John, who had struck a lot of his old
chums, came and borrowed twenty-five dollars from me, having already
spent his one hundred and fourteen dollars that he had when he struck
town.

I went to bed early that night, as I had promised to go with Clement
early next morning to make a search for the missing herd.

The next morning when Clement and I were fixing to strike out, John came
to me, looking bad after his all night rampage, to get his horse and
saddle out of "soak." I done so, which cost me thirty-five dollars, and
never seen the poor boy afterwards. Shortly after that he went to Ft.
Sumner and was killed by one of "Billy the Kid's" men, a fellow by the
name of Barney Mason. Thus ended the life of a good man who, like scores
of others, let the greatest curse ever known to mankind, whisky, get the
upper hand of him.

Clement and I pulled south, our ponies loaded down with ammunition so in
case the indians got us corralled we could stand them off a few days, at
least. We were well armed, both having a good winchester and a couple of
colts' pistols apiece.

We found the outfit coming down Crooked Creek; they having left the main
trail, or road, on the Cimeron, and came over a much longer route, to
avoid driving over a dry stretch of country, forty miles between water.
Hence John and I missing them. No doubt but that it was a lucky move in
them taking that route, for, on the other, they would have just about
come in contact with the three or four hundred Cheyenne reds, whose
bloody deeds are still remembered in that country.

On arriving in town with the herd we split it in two, making four
hundred head in each bunch, and put one half on the cars to be shipped
to Chicago. I accompanied the first lot, while Clement remained to come
on with the next.

In Burlington, Iowa, I met Mr. Beals. We lay there all day feeding and
watering the cattle.

On arriving in Chicago, I went right to the Palmer house, but after
paying one dollar for dinner I concluded its price too high for a common
clod-hopper like myself. So I moved to the Ervin House, close to the
Washington Street tunnel, a two dollar a day house.

That night I turned myself loose taking in the town, or at least a
little corner of it. I squandered about fifteen dollars that night on
boot-blacks alone. Every one of the little imps I met struck me for a
dime, or something to eat. They knew, at a glance, from the cut of my
jib, that they had struck a bonanza. They continued to "work" me too,
during my whole stay in the city. At one time, while walking with Mr.
Beals and another gentleman, a crowd of them who had spied me from
across the street, yelled "Yonder goes our Texas Ranger! Lets tackle him
for some stuff!"

About the third day I went broke, and from that time on I had to borrow
from Mr. Beals. I left there about a hundred dollars in his debt.

After spending six days in the city I left for Dodge City, Kansas, in
company with Mr. Beals and Erskine Clement, who, instead of stopping at
Dodge, continued on to Grenada, Colorado, where the "Beals Cattle Co."
still held their headquarters.

Arriving in Dodge City, I found Whiskey-peet, whom I had left in
Anderson's stable, all O. K., and mounting him I struck out all alone
for the "L. X." ranch, two hundred and twenty-five miles.

Arriving at the ranch I found the noted "Billy the Kid" and his gang
there. Among his daring followers were the afterwards noted Tom
O'Phalliard, and Henry Brown, leader of the Medicine Lodge Bank tragedy
which happened in 1884, who was shot in trying to escape, while his
three companions were hung. "The Kid" was there trying to dispose of a
herd of ponies he had stolen from the "Seven River warriors" in Lincoln
County, New Mexico--his bitter enemies whom he had fought so hard
against, that past summer, in what is known as the "bloody Lincoln
County war of '78." During his stay at the ranch and around Tascosa, I
became intimately acquainted with him and his jovial crowd. I mention
these facts because I intend to give you a brief sketch of Billy's
doings, in the closing pages of this book.




CHAPTER XIX.

A LONELY RIDE OF ELEVEN HUNDRED MILES.


After laying around the ranch a couple of weeks, Mr. Moore put me in
charge of a scouting outfit and sent me out on the South Plains to drift
about all winter, watching for cattle thieves, etc.; also to turn back
any cattle that might slip by the "sign riders" and drift across the
Plains.

During that winter we, that is my crowd, went to church several times. A
little Colony of Christians headed by the Rev. Cahart, had settled on
the head of Salt Fork, a tributary of Red river, and built a church
house in which the little crowd, numbering less than fifty souls would
congregate every Sunday and pray.

That same little church house now ornaments the thriving little city of
Clarendon, County seat of Donley County. The old inhabitants point to it
with pride when telling of how it once stood solitary and alone out on
the great buffalo range two hundred miles from nowhere.

The Colony had come from Illinois and drifted away out there beyond the
outskirts of civilization to get loose from that demon whisky. And early
that coming spring a lot of ruffians started a saloon in their midst. A
meeting was called in the little church house and resolutions passed to
drive them out, if in no other way, with powder and lead. They pulled
their freight and I am proud to state that I had a hand in making them
pull it; for the simple reason that they had no business encroaching
upon those good people's rights.

When spring opened Mr. Moore called me in from the Plains and put me in
charge of a rounding-up outfit, which consisted of twelve riders and a
cook.

To begin rounding-up, we went over to Canyon Paladuro, where Chas.
Goodnight had a ranch, and where a great many of the river cattle had
drifted during the winter. There was about a hundred men and seven or
eight wagons in the outfit that went over. We stopped over Sunday in the
little Christian Colony and went to church. The Rev. Cahart preached
about the wild and woolly Cow Boy of the west; how the eastern people
had him pictured off as a kind of animal with horns, etc. While to him,
looking down from his dry goods box pulpit into the manly faces of
nearly a hundred of them, they looked just like human beings, minus the
standing collar, etc.

About the first of July, Moore sent me to Nickerson, Kansas, with a herd
of eight hundred shipping steers. My outfit consisted of five men, a
chuck wagon, etc. Our route lay over a wild strip of country where there
was no trails nor scarcely any ranches--that is, until reaching the
southern line of Kansas.

We arrived at Nickerson after being on the road two months. "Deacon"
Bates, Mr. Beals partner, was there waiting for us. He had come through
with several herds that had left the ranch a month ahead of us. He was
still holding some of the poorest ones, south of town, where he had a
camp established.

After loading my wagon with a fresh supply of grub, Mr. Bates, or the
"Deacon" as he was more commonly called, sent me back over the trail he
and his outfits had come, to gather lost steers--some they had lost
coming through.

I was gone about a month and came back with eighteen head. We had a soft
trip of it, as most of our hard work was such as buying butter, eggs,
etc., from the scattering grangers along the Kansas border. We never
missed a meal on the trip, and always had the best the country afforded,
regardless of cost. Deacon Bates was always bragging on some of his
bosses, how cheap they could live, etc. I just thought I would try him
this time, being in a country where luxuries were plentiful, and see if
he wouldn't blow on me as being a person with good horse sense. An
animal of course, as we all know, will eat the choicest grub he can get;
and why not man, when he is credited with having more sense than the
horse, one of the most intellectual animals that exists?

On our return to Nickerson, I concluded to quit and spend the winter
with mother, whom I received letters from every now and then begging me
to come home. As I wasn't certain of coming back, I thought it best to
go overland and take Whisky-peet along, for I couldn't even bear the
_thought_ of parting with him; and to hire a car to take him around by
rail would be too costly.

I got all ready to start and then went to Deacon Bates for a settlement.
He took my account book and, after looking it over, said: "Why, Dum-it
to h--l, I can't pay no such bills as those! Why, Dum-it all, old Jay
Gould would groan under the weight of these bills!" He then went on to
read some of the items aloud. They ran as follows: Cod-fish $10; eggs
$40; butter $70; milk $5; bacon $150; flour $200; canned fruits $400;
sundries $600, etc., etc. Suffice it to say, the old gent told me in
plain Yankee English that I would have to go to Chicago and settle with
Mr. Beals. I hated the idea of going to Chicago, for I knew my
failings--I was afraid I wouldn't have money enough left when I got back
to pay my expenses home.

That same evening a letter came from Mr. Beals stating that he had just
received a letter from Moore, at the ranch, in which he informed him
that there were two more herds on the trail for Nickerson, and, as it
was getting so near winter, for Joe Hargraves, better known as
"Jinglebob Joe," and I to go and turn them to Dodge City, the nearest
shipping point.

After putting Whisky-peet and my "Missouri" mare, one I had bought to
use as a pack-horse going home, in care of an old granger to be fed and
taken good care of until my return, Joe and I struck out with only one
horse apiece--just the ones we were riding.

On our arrival in Dodge I pulled out for Chicago, to get a settlement,
with the first train load we shipped. I took my saddle, bridle, spurs,
etc. along and left them in Atchison, Mo., the first point we stopped to
feed at, until my return.

Arriving in Chicago, I told Mr. Beals that I was going home to spend the
winter, and therefore wanted to settle up.

He set 'em up to a fine Havana and then proceeded. Every time he came to
one of those big bills, which caused the Deacon's eyes to bulge out, he
would grunt and crack about a forty-cent smile, but never kicked.

When he had finished there was a few hundred dollars to my credit. He
then asked me if I could think of anything else that I had forgotten to
charge the "company" with? Of course I couldn't, because I didn't have
time; his question was put to me too sudden. If I could have had a few
hours to myself, to figure the thing up just right, I think I could have
satisfied the old Gent.

I remained in the city three days taking in the sights and feeding the
hungry little boot blacks. When leaving, Mr. Beals informed me that he
was going to buy a lot of southern Texas cattle, to put on his Panhandle
ranch, the coming spring, and if I wanted a job, to hold myself in
readiness to boss one of the herds up the trail for him. Of course that
just suited me, providing I couldn't make up my mind to remain at home.

Landing in Nickerson I hired a horse and went out to the old granger's
ranch where I had left my two ponies. They were both fat and feeling
good.

Before starting out on my little journey of only eleven hundred miles, I
bought a pack-saddle and cooking outfit--that is, just a frying pan,
small coffee pot, etc. I used the mare for a pack animal and rode
Whisky-peet. I had just six dollars left when I rode out of Nickerson.

I went through Fort Reno and Fort Sill, Indian territory and crossed Red
river into Texas on the old military road, opposite Henrietta.

When within ten miles of Denton, Texas, on Pecan creek, Whisky-peet
became lame--so much so that he could scarcely walk. I was stopping over
night with a Mr. Cobb, and next morning I first noticed his lameness.

I lacked about twenty-five cents of having enough to pay Mr. Cobb for my
night's lodging that morning. I had sold my watch for five dollars a
short while before and now that was spent.

Whisky-peet being too lame to travel, I left him with Mr. Cobb while I
rode into Denton to try and make a raise of some money.

I tried to swap my mare off for a smaller animal and get some boot, but
every one seemed to think that she had been stolen; I being so anxious
to swap.

I rode back to Mr. Cobb's that night in the same fix, financially, as
when I left that morning.

The next day I made a raise of some money. Mr. Cobb and I made a saddle
swap, he giving me twenty dollars to boot. He and I also swapped
bridles, I getting four dollars and a half to boot. One of his little
boys then gave me his saddle and one dollar and a half for my
pack-saddle, which had cost me ten dollars in Nickerson. I then had lots
of money.

Whisky-peet soon got over his lameness, having just stuck a little snag
into the frog of his foot, which I succeeded in finding and pulling out
before it had time to do serious damage, and I started on my journey
again.

On arriving in Denton that time, a negro struck me for a horse swap
right away. I got a three year old pony and six dollars in money for my
mare; the pony suited just as well for a pack animal as the mare.

The next day after leaving Denton, I stopped in a negro settlement and
won a fifty-dollar horse, running Whisky-peet against a sleepy looking
grey. I had up twenty dollars in money and my Winchester, a fine silver
mounted gun. I won the race by at least ten open feet, but the negroes
tried to swindle me out of it.

While riding along that evening three negroes rode up and claimed the
horse I had won. They claimed that the parties who bet him off had no
right to him, as they just had borrowed him from one of them to ride to
the Settlement that morning. I finally let them have him for twenty
dollars.

I went through the following towns after leaving Denton: Ft. Worth,
Clenborn, Hillsborough, Waco, Herrene, Bryant, Brenham and Columbus;
besides scores of smaller places.

I rode up to mother's little shanty on Cashe's creek after being on the
road just a month and twelve days.

To say that mother was glad to see me would only half express it. She
bounced me the first thing about not coming back the next fall after
leaving as I had promised. I had been gone nearly four years.




CHAPTER XX.

ANOTHER START UP THE CHISHOLM TRAIL.


I hadn't been at home but a few days when I came very near getting
killed by a falling house.

Mother had become tired of the neighborhood she lived in and wanted me
to move her and her shanty down the creek about a mile, to Mr.
Cornelius's. So hiring a yoke of oxen--although a pair of goats would
have answered the purpose--I hauled her household goods down to the spot
selected. I then went to work tearing the shanty down.

In building it I had set eight pine posts two feet in the ground, and
then nailed the sidings, etc., to them. There was only one room and it
was eight feet wide and fourteen long. The roof had been made of heavy
pine boards. After tearing both ends out, I climbed onto the roof to
undo that.

I was a-straddle of the sharp roof, about midway, axe in one hand and a
large chisel in the other, when all at once the sides began spreading
out at the top. Of course I began sinking slowly but surely, until
everything went down with a crash. The pine posts had become rotten from
the top of the ground down; and just as soon as the roof and I had
struck bottom the sides flopped over onto us.

A neighbor's little boy by the name of Benny Williams, had been
monkeying around watching me work, and unluckily he was inside of the
shanty when the collapse came.

I was sensible, but unable to move, there being so much weight on me.

Finally little Benny who was one thickness of boards under me woke up
and began squalling like a six months old calf being put through the
process of branding.

After squalling himself hoarse he began to moan most pitiously. That was
too much for me. I could stand his bleating but his moaning for help put
new life into my lazy muscles, causing me to exert every nerve in my
body, so as to get out and render the poor boy assistance. I had, before
the boy's cries disturbed me, made up my mind to lie still and wait for
something to turn up.

In exerting myself I found that I could move my body down towards my
feet, an inch at a time. The weight was all on my left shoulder. But it
soon came in contact with something else, which relieved my bruised
shoulder of most of the weight.

I got out finally after a long and painful struggle; and securing help
from the Morris ranch, fished Benny out. He had one leg broken below the
knee, besides other bruises. I was slightly disfigured, but still in the
ring.

I put in the winter visiting friends, hunting, etc. I had sold my
cattle--the mavricks branded nearly four years before--to Mr. Geo.
Hamilton, at the market price, from five to ten dollars a head,
according to quality, to be paid for when he got his own brand put on to
them. Every now and then he would brand a few, and with the money
received for them I would buy grub and keep up my dignity.

About the first of March I received a letter from Mr. Rosencrans, one of
D. T. Beals' partners, stating that Mr. Beals had bought his cattle in
middle Texas instead of southern as he had expected, and as he had told
me in Chicago. "But," continued the letter, "we have bought a herd from
Charles Word of Goliad, on the San Antonia River, to be delivered at our
Panhandle ranch and have secured you the job of bossing it. Now should
you wish to come back and work for us, go out and report to Mr. Word at
once."

The next day I kissed mother good-bye, gave Whisky peet a hug, patted
Chief--a large white dog that I had picked up in the Indian Territory on
my way through--a few farewell pats on the head, mounted "Gotch"--a pony
I had swapped my star-spangled winchester for--and struck out for
Goliad, ninety miles west. Leaving Whisky-peet behind was almost as
severe on me as having sixteen jaw-teeth pulled. I left him, in Horace
Yeamans' care, so that I could come back by rail the coming fall. I
failed to come back though that fall as I expected, therefore never got
to see the faithful animal again; he died the following spring.

A three days' ride brought me to Goliad, the place where Fannin and his
brave followers met their sad fate during the Mexican war. It was dark
when I arrived there. After putting up my horse, I learned from the old
gent Mr. Word, who was a saddler, and whom I found at work in his shop,
that his son Charlie was out at Beeville, gathering a bunch of cattle.

Next morning I struck out for Beeville, thirty miles west, arriving
there about four o'clock in the afternoon.

About sun-down I found Charles Word, and his crowd of muddy
cow-punchers, five miles west of town. They were almost up to their ears
in mud, (it having been raining all day,) trying to finish "road
branding" that lot of steers before dark. The corral having no "chute"
the boys had to rope and wrestle with the wild brutes until the hot iron
could be applied to their wet and muddy sides.

When I rode up to the corral, Charlie came out, and I introduced myself.
He shook my hand with a look of astonishment on his brow, as much as to
say, I'll be----if Beals mustn't be crazy, sending this smooth-faced kid
here to take charge of a herd for me! He finally after talking awhile
told me that I would have to work under Mr. Stephens, until we got ready
to put up the Beals herd--or at least the one I was to accompany. He
also told me to keep the boys from knowing that I was going to boss the
next herd, as several of them were fishing for the job, and might
become stubborn should they know the truth.

I went on "night-guard" after supper and it continued to rain all night,
so that I failed to get any sleep; but then I didn't mind it, as I was
well rested.

The next day after going to work, was when I caught fits though, working
in a muddy pen all day. When night came I didn't feel as much like going
on guard as I did the night before. A laughable circumstance happened
that morning after going into the branding-pen.

As the pen had no "chute" we had to rope and tie down, while applying
the brand. The men working in pairs, one, which ever happened to get a
good chance, to catch the animal by both fore feet as he run by which
would "bump" him, that is, capsize him. The other fellow would then be
ready to jump aboard and hold him until securely fastened. There being
only seven of us to do the roping that morning, it of course left one
man without a "pard," and that one was me. Each one you see is always
anxious to get a good roper for a "pard," as then everything works
smoothly. Mr. Word told me to sit on the fence and rest until Ike Word,
an old negro who used to belong to the Word family, and who was the best
roper in the crowd, returned from town where he had been sent with a
message.

It wasn't long till old Ike galloped up, wearing a broad grin. He was
very anxious to get in the pen and show "dem fellers de art of cotching
um by boaf front feet." But when his boss told him he would have to take
me for a "pard" his broad grin vanished. Calling Mr. Word to one side he
told him that he didn't want that yankee for a "pard," as he would have
to do all the work, etc. He was told to try me one round and if I didn't
suit he could take some one else. Shortly afterwards while passing Mr.
Word old Ike whispered and said: "Dogon me if dat yankee don't surprise
de natives!" When night came, and while I was on herd, old Ike sat
around the camp fire wondering to the other boys "whar dat yankee
learned to rope so well." You see Mr. Word had told the boys that I was
from the Panhandle, and old Ike thought the Panhandle was way up in
Yankeedom somewhere, hence he thinking I was a yankee. A few days after
that though, I satisfied old Ike that I was a thoroughbred.

Mr. Word bought a bunch of ponies, new arrivals from Mexico, and among
them was a large iron-grey, which the mexicans had pointed out as being
"Muncho Deablo." None of the boys, not even old Ike, cared to tackle
him. So one morning I caught and saddled him. He fought like a tiger
while being saddled; and after getting it securely fastened he threw it
off and stamped it into a hundred pieces, with his front feet, which
caused me to have to buy a new one next day. I then borrowed Mr.
Stephens' saddle, and after getting securely seated in it, raised the
blinds and gave him the full benefit of spurs and quirt. After pitching
about half a mile, me, saddle and all went up in the air, the girths
having broken. But having the "hackimore" rope fastened to my belt I
held to him until help arrived. I then borrowed another saddle, and this
time stayed with him. From that on, old Ike recognized me as a genuine
cow-puncher.

We finally got that herd, of thirty-seven hundred steers, ready for the
trail; but the very night after getting them counted and ready to turn
over to Mr. Stephens the next morning, they stampeded, half of them
getting away and mixing up with thousands of other cattle.

Mr. Stephens thought he would try a new scheme that trip up the trail,
so he bought a lot of new bulls-eye lanterns to be used around the herd
on dark, stormy nights, so that each man could tell just where the other
was stationed by the reflection of his light.

This night in question being very dark and stormy, Stephens thought he
would christen his new lamps. He gave me one, although I protested
against such nonsense.

About ten o'clock some one suddenly flashed his bulls-eye towards the
herd, and off they went, as though shot out of a gun.

In running my horse at full speed in trying to get to the lead, or in
front of them, me, horse, bulls-eye and all went over an old rail
fence--where there had once been a ranch--in a pile. I put the entire
blame onto the lamp, the light of which had blinded my horse so that he
didn't see the fence.

I wasn't long in picking myself up and mounting my horse who was
standing close by, still trembling from the shock he received. I left
the lamp where it lay, swearing vengeance against the use of them,
around cattle, and dashed off after the flying herd.

When daylight came I and a fellow by the name of Glass, found ourselves
with about half of the herd, at least ten miles from camp. The rest of
the herd was scattered all over the country, badly mixed up with other
cattle. It took us several days to get the lost ones gathered, and the
herd in shape again.

After bidding Stephens and the boys who were to accompany him, adieu, to
meet again on Red River where he was to wait for us, we pulled for
Goliad to rig up a new outfit, horses, wagon, etc.

The horses, Word bought out of a mexican herd which had just arrived
from Old Mexico. He gave eighteen dollars a head for the choice, out of
several hundred head.

Being all ready to start for Kimble County, two hundred miles northwest,
where the herd was to be gathered, Mr. Word turned the outfit over to
me, while he went around by stage.




CHAPTER XXI.

A TRIP WHICH TERMINATED IN THE CAPTURE OF "BILLY THE KID."


We went through San Antonio and lay there long enough to have all of our
horses shod, as we were going into a mountainous country where they
couldn't stand it without shoes. While there I visited the Almo building
where poor Davy Crocket and his brave companions bit the dust.

We arrived at our destination, Joe Taylor's ranch, on Paint creek a
small tributary to the Llano, at last; and it was one of the roughest,
rockiest, God-forsaken countries I ever put foot on.

We finally, after three weeks hard work, got the herd of twenty-five
hundred head started towards the north star. We were awful glad to get
out of there too, for our horses were all nearly peetered out, and the
men on the war-path, from having to work twenty-six hours a day.

At Red river we overtook Stephens and changed herds with him, his being
the ones to go to Beal's ranch, while the others were for the Wyoming
market.

After parting with Stephens again we turned in a northwesterly direction
and arrived at the "L. X." ranch on the first day of July.

Moore sent me right out on the Plains to hold the herd I came up with,
until fall. That just suited me as I needed a rest.

After turning the herd loose on the range about the first of September,
I was put in charge of a branding outfit. Our work then was drifting
over the range branding calves.

Late in the fall when all the branding was done, Moore put me in charge
of a scouting outfit and sent me out on the Plains to drift around, the
same as previous winters.

I hadn't been there long, though, when he sent word for me to turn my
outfit over to James McClaughety and come in to the ranch; and to bring
three of my picked men along.

On arriving at the ranch I found that he wanted me to take an outfit and
go to New Mexico after a lot of cattle that "Billy the Kid" had stolen
and run over there.

The cattlemen along the Canadian river had hired a fellow by the name of
Frank Stuart to keep a lookout for stolen cattle in New Mexico; and
along in the summer he came to the Panhandle and notified the different
cattlemen who had him employed that "Billy the Kid" and his gang were
making a regular business of stealing Panhandle cattle and selling them
to an old fellow named Pat Cohglin who had a large ranch on Three
rivers, close to Ft. Stanton.

The outfits then made up a crowd between them, and sent with Stuart,
giving him orders to go right to the Cohglin ranch and take all the
cattle found there, in their brands.

But Mr. Stuart failed to go nearer than forty miles from where the
cattle were reported to be. He claimed that Cohglin, who had a
blood-thirsty crowd around him, sent him word that if he got the cattle
he would have to take some hot lead with them, or something to that
effect. So Stuart came back, claiming he didn't have men enough.

This made Moore mad, so he concluded to rig up an outfit of his own and
send them over after the cattle, hence he sending out after me.

My outfit, after getting it rigged up, consisted of a chuck wagon with
four good mules to pull it, a cook and five picked men, named as
follows: James East, Lee Hall, Lon Chambers, Cal Pope and last but not
by any means least "Big-foot Wallace." They all, except me, had one
extra good horse apiece; I had two. Moore thought it best not to have
many horses to feed, as corn would be scarce and high. He thought it
best to buy more if we needed them.

On starting, Moore gave me these orders: "Stay over there until you get
those cattle or bust the "L. X." company. I will keep you supplied in
money just as long as they have got a nickel left, that I can get hold
of. And when you get the cattle if you think you can succeed in
capturing "Billy the Kid" do so. You can hire all the men you need; but
don't undertake his capture until you have first secured the cattle."

At Tascosa we met Stuart who had succeeded in raising a little crowd to
join us. Mr. McCarty, boss of the "L. I. T." ranch had furnished five
men, a cook and chuck wagon; and Torry, whose ranch was further up the
river, a wagon and two men, while a man by the name of Johnson furnished
a man and wagon. The "L. I. T." outfit was in charge of a fellow by the
name of "Bob" Roberson, whose orders were to get the stolen cattle
before trying to capture the Kid, but in the meantime, to be governed by
Stuart's orders. This placed "Bob" in bad shape, as you will see later.

Stuart, after we all got strung out, took the "buck-board" on the mail
line, and went on ahead to Las Vegas to put in a week or so with his
solid girl.

On arriving at San Lorenzo, New Mexico, I mounted a buck-board and
struck out ahead, to Las Vegas, to buy a lot of corn, grub, ammunition,
etc., to be delivered at Anton Chico, twenty-five miles south of
"Vegas," by the time the crowd got there, so as not to cause any delay.
"Bob" Roberson also gave me money to buy a lot of stuff for his outfit.

Arriving in Vegas, during a severe snow storm, I found there wasn't
fifty bushels of corn in town, the snow storm having delayed the freight
trains. One merchant had just got a bill of several car loads which he
expected to arrive any minute. So I concluded I would wait--and help
Stuart hold the town down.

I wrote a letter to Anton Chico, telling the boys to lay there and take
it easy, as I might be detained several days waiting for corn.

Every morning I would go to the grain merchant, and receive this reply:
"Am looking for it every minute; t'will certainly be here by night."

Not being acquainted in town, time passed off very slowly, so I finally
got to "bucking" at my old favorite game--monte. I won for a while, but
finally my luck took a turn and I lost nearly every dollar I had in my
possession, most of which belonged to my employers. The one hundred
dollars that "Bob" Roberson gave to buy stuff for his outfit, also went.

While standing over the exciting game, after my pile had dwindled down
to an even seventy dollars, I put just half of it, thirty-five dollars,
on the Queen, or "horse," as it is called, being the picture of a woman
on horseback, and made a vow, if I lost that bet that I never would as
long as I lived, "buck" at monte again. I lost, and my vow has been
sacredly kept.

The corn finally arrived, but having no money, I had to run my face by
giving an order on the "L. X." company, payable on demand. The other
stuff, ammunition, etc., also things "Bob" had sent for, I had to buy in
the same manner. Of course I hated to give orders so soon after leaving
the ranch with a pocketfull of money, but then that was the best I
could do under existing circumstances.

After getting the goods started for Anton Chico, Stuart and I hired a
rig and followed.

Arriving in "Chico" we found Barney Mason, (an ex-chum of the "Kid's,"
but now a deputy sheriff under Pat Garrett) there, with a message from
Garrett telling Stuart to meet him in Vegas at a certain date, on
important business. So Stuart struck right back to Vegas, accompanied by
Mason, as the date fixed was only a few days off.

I found the boys all well and having a fat time. The only thing that
bothered me they had run in debt head over heels on the strength of me
having lots of money. The merchants expected their pay according to
contract, immediately after my arrival. I had to satisfy them with
orders on the "L. X." firm.

The boys had lots of news to relate, things that had happened after I
left: One of "Bob's" men had had a shooting scrape with some mexicans;
and "Billy the Kid" and his crowd had been in town, they having come in
afoot, and went out well mounted. He and his five men having hoofed it
through deep snow from the Greathouse ranch, over a hundred miles
southwest of there.

After getting everything in shape we pulled out for White Oaks, one
hundred and fifty miles southwest.

The second night out we camped at the Lewelling Wells, where bright and
early next morning Stuart overtook us; accompanied by Pat Garrett and
Barney Mason. They came with a scheme all cut and dried, by which they
could get the big reward offered for the "Kid." Garrett knew the Kid and
his few remaining followers had been to Chico and left for Fort Sumner a
few days before; and that they were wore out from having been chased all
over the country by a gang of ninety men from White Oaks and vicinity.
Now was his time to strike, if he could just get Stuart to go in cahoots
with him. That was soon accomplished; a promise of half of the reward, I
suppose, done the work. Hence he sending for Stuart to come and see him
in "Vegas" on important business.

After eating breakfast Stuart broke the ice by telling a lie. He knew
our orders were strictly to get the cattle first, and then if we could
assist in the capture of the "Kid" to do so. Therefore he branched out
thus: "Well boys, we have got a job on our hands: 'Kid' is on his way to
Old Mexico with a bunch of Panhandle cattle; and we want every man in
the outfit, except just enough to accompany the wagons to White Oaks, to
go with Garrett and I to overtake them."

"How can that be," someone asked "when Kid and his men just left Anton
Chico a few days ago?"

"Don't know," was the quick answer, unless some of his outfit had the
cattle under herd somewhere down the river waiting for him. If you doubt
my word about it, just ask Mr. Garrett, there.

Of course we all did doubt his word, and were well satisfied that it was
a put up job, to gain the reward.

"Bob" Roberson and I went to one side and talked the matter over, while
Stuart and his little party remained at camp wondering whether their
little scheme would have strength to hold out, on its weak legs or not.

"Bob" was in favor, after we had talked the thing over, of going right
back and telling Stuart in plain English that he lied. But I wouldn't
agree to that for fear it might accidently be true. I thought it strange
that Garrett, who had the reputation of being a model of a man, would
sit by with his mouth shut and listen to such a falsehood. Of course
Garrett couldn't be blamed very much for he, being Sheriff, was
interested in the "Kid's" capture, no matter what became of the cattle
we had come after.

"Bob" and I finally concluded, for fear the statement might be true, to
let them have a few men, but not enough to completely cripple us so that
we couldn't go on after the cattle should we think it best, after
getting to White Oaks.

I let them take three out of my crowd: "Jim" East, "Lon" Chambers and
"Lee" Hall. While "Bob" gave up two, "Tom" Emory and Louis Bozman.
Stuart wasn't satisfied, he wanted more. But not being successful in
getting his whole wants supplied, they all rode off down the Pecos
valley.

Shortly after they left we pulled out on the White Oaks road. That night
it began to snow, and kept it up for several days until the whole ground
was covered to the depth of from two to three feet; so that it was slow
work getting our wagons along through it.

A few days afterwards we came to the Greathouse ranch, or at least to
the hot ashes where it once stood, where "Kid" and six of his daring
followers were surrounded by ninety men one whole night and day. It was
as follows:

A squad of men left White Oaks to hunt the "Kid" who was lurking in the
neighborhood. They suddenly came upon him and Bill Willson cooking their
breakfasts, one morning.

On discovering their enemies they both, after firing a shot apiece, sped
through the mountains like deer, leaving their horses, saddles, coats
and breakfast behind.

One of the shots fired at the White Oaks party took effect in the brain
of a good horse that a young man by the name of Johnny Hudgens was
riding, while the other, went through a hat, on the head of a young man.

After following the trail through the deep snow awhile, and after
satisfying themselves that the two young outlaws couldn't hide their
tracks, the party struck back to White Oaks after something to eat, and
more men.

When they returned, that same evening, there was ninety men in the
crowd. They got on the trail and followed it, until shortly after dark,
when it brought them to within a few hundred yards of the Greathouse
ranch, on the "Vegas" and White Oaks road.

To satisfy themselves that the game was bagged, they circled around the
ranch to see that no trails were leading out from it.

They then stationed themselves in a circle around the house and,
dismounting, began to make breast-works out of pine logs--the ranch
being in the midst of a large pine grove.

When day-light came Greathouse sent a negro, who was stopping with him,
out after the horses which had been hobbled the night before.

Mr. "Nig" hadn't gone but a few hundred yards when he was captured by
the White Oaks boys.

After learning from him that the "Kid" and five of his men were in the
house they sent him back with a note to the "Kid," telling him if he and
his party would come out with their hands up they would be treated as
prisoners of war; if not they would have to stand the consequences, etc.

In a few minutes the negro returned with a note from the "Kid," stating:
"You fellers go to h--l!" or something to that effect.

A consultation was then held, and finally decided to give the boys one
more chance for their lives, before storming the house. So they sent
Mr. Coon back with another note stating, that that would be their last
chance, etc.

In a short while a new messenger came forward. It was "Jim" Greathouse,
proprietor of the ranch. He stated that the "Kid" desired to have a talk
with their leader. On asking him what assurance he could give that their
leader wouldn't be harmed, he replied, "myself." He told them that they
could hold him a prisoner, and if anything happened to Carlyle, he was
willing to stand the consequences.

So Mr. "Jim" Carlyle, he being the leader, marched forward--never more
to return--to have a talk with the "Kid".

Arriving in the house where there was also a saloon, kept there to
accommodate the thirsty traveler, he was made to go up to the bar and
drink "health to Billy the Kid." This of course went against the grain
with "Jim," but then what else could he do now, being at their mercy?

Finally the Kid spied one of the gloves he had left behind in his
retreat the day before, sticking out of "Jim's" coat pocket.

This revived the hardships he and Billy Willson were compelled to
endure, nearly all day the day before, traveling through snow up to
their knees. So pulling the glove out of "Jim's" pocket and holding it
up at arms length, he asked: "Jim, was you with that mob yesterday who
caused me such a tramp through the snow?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"Well then, come up and take your last drink on this earth, for I am
going to blow your light out."

"Jim" of course didn't relish the half pint of rotgut that he was forced
to drink at the point of a colts "45."

After drinking a full glass himself the "Kid" threw his pistol down in
"Jim's" face, full cocked, telling him at the same time to say his
prayers while he slowly counted "three."

The "one, two, three!" was uttered, and then a pistol shot rang out upon
the still air, re-echoing from the mountain sides, in every direction.

The bullet had struck its mark, a tin can hanging on the wall a few
inches above "Jim's" head.

"Well, Jim," was the first words that broke the death-like silence
within, "you are worth several dead men yet, ain't you?" Said "Kid"
grabbing "Jim's" trembling hand and leading him up to the bar, over
which Billy Willson handed the fiery bug-juice.

"You didn't think I would be brute enough to shoot you in _such_ a
cowardly manner, did you, Jim?" continued the "Kid" setting his empty
glass down on the counter.

The shot from within had excited the crowd outside almost to fever heat;
they thinking that it meant their leaders' death. One fellow during the
exciting moment scribbled off a note which read thus: "If Carlyle ain't
out here in ten minutes by the watch, your friend Greathouse will be a
corpse," and sent it to the "Kid" by the negro, who had returned after
delivering the last message which brought Greathouse out.

The note was read in the presence of Carlyle, so that he heard every
word it contained.

"Kid" then answered it by stating: "Carlyle is safe, but we can't give
him up just yet. Now remember, if we hear a shot from the outside we
will take it for granted that you have carried out your threats by
killing Greathouse, and will have to pay you back by killing our
prisoner," etc.

"Jim" knew the substance of the note and trembled in his boots at the
thoughts of an accident shot being fired by his party. He was satisfied
that his men wouldn't do as they threatened in the note after hearing,
from the negro's own lips, that he was still alive. It was the
_accident_ shot that disturbed his mind.

The negro hadn't more than got behind the breastworks with the note when
a man, stationed behind another breastwork, who knew nothing of the
threat having been made, fired a shot at the house "just for fun."

Carlyle, on hearing the shot, made a leap at the only glass window in
the house, taking sash and all with him. But before striking the ground
several bullets from the "Kids" well aimed "45" had pierced his body. He
crawled a few yards and then fell over dead, in plain view of his eighty
odd companions.

"Kid" claimed afterwards that he was sorry for having had to kill "Jim."
Their intentions were to hold him prisoner until dark, when they would
tie him down, so he couldn't give the alarm, and then make their
escape.

From that on, the mad crowd outside kept up a continued firing at the
log house until dark. But doing no damage, as the boys had breast-works
built of sacks of flour, boxes, bedding, etc.

Jim Greathouse during the excitement gave his guards the slip and pulled
for "tall timber" up in the mountains where it was almost impossible for
a mounted man to follow. I have often afterwards heard Greathouse laugh
over the matter and tell how he "just hit the high places," and beat
Goldsmith Maid's fastest time, for the first half mile.

About ten o'clock that night the White Oaker's began to get tired and
hungry, so concluded they would go back to town, forty miles, fill up,
get a fresh mount and return by daylight, without the "Kid" and his men
knowing anything of it. They stole off very slyly, without making any
noise, and when they got about a mile, put their horses down to their
best licks.

About midnight the little party inside made a bold break for liberty.
They headed north-east, with cocked winchesters, determined on fighting
their way out. But they were happily disappointed.

A ten-mile tramp through snow brought them to the Spencer ranch, which
was kept by a kind old man by the name of Spencer, who lived there all
alone, and was trying to establish a shorter route from "Vegas" to the
"Oaks" by turning the road by his place, where there was a fine spring
of water, a luxury the Greathouse ranch lacked, they having to haul
water a distance of several miles from up in the rough mountains.

Just as day was breaking the crowd returned from the "Oaks," and finding
their game had fled they set fire to the house and struck out on the
newly made foot prints.

Arriving at the Spencer ranch they learned, from the old gentleman, that
the "Kid" and his little party of five had been gone about two hours,
and that they had eaten breakfast with him.

After continuing on the trail about an hour longer, until it brought
them to a rough strip of country where they would be compelled to take
it afoot, they gave up the chase, and turned back to take their spite
out on poor old Spencer for feeding the "Kid" and his crowd.

They took the poor old harmless fellow out to a neighboring tree, after
setting fire to his ranch, and put a rope around his neck; but before
they had time to swing him up, a few of the men, who had been opposed
from the start, interfered in the old man's behalf. Thus his neck was
saved, and he is to-day a highly respected citizen in that community,
which has since that time become a rich mining district.

The "Kid" and his men made it into Anton Chico, where, as I stated
before, they stole a good horse and saddle apiece, while the boys were
there waiting for me to arrive from "Vegas," and pulled down the Reo
Pecos.




CHAPTER XXII.

BILLY THE KID'S CAPTURE


We arrived in the beautifully located town of White Oaks on the 23d day
of December, (1880). The town, which consisted of 1000 inhabitants,
mostly American miners, was then not quite two years old and pretty
lively for its age. It contained eight saloons; and Saturday nights when
the boys would come in from the surrounding mountains, to spend the
Sabbath, is when the little burg would put on city airs.

We rented a large log house in the lower end of town and went to living
like white folks. We had no money, but we struck two of the merchants
who gave us an unlimited credit until we could make a raise. Our
greatest expense was feeding the horses corn which cost five cents a
pound and hay, two cents a pound. The grub we ate wasn't very expensive
as we stole all of our meat, and shared with our honest neighbors who
thought it a great sin to kill other people's cattle. You see "Bob" and
I still clung to the old Texas style which is, never kill one of your
own beeves when you can get somebody else's.

We had concluded not to go after the stolen cattle until the rest of the
boys got there, by which time the deep snow would be melted, maybe, so
that we could scour the White Mountains, where the cattle were reported
to be, out thoroughly.

New-Year's night we had a bushel of fun making the citizens think that
"Billy the Kid" had taken the town. Billy was in the habit of "shooting
the town up a lot" every now and then, hence, every time a few dozen
shots were fired at an unusually late hour, they putting it down as
being some of his devilment.

We first sent one of our crowd up-town to the billiard hall, where most
of the men generally congregated, and especially "Pinto Tom," the
marshal, whose maneuvers we were anxious to learn, to watch and see what
kind of an effect our shooting had on the people.

At precisely twelve o'clock we got out with winchesters and
six-shooters, cooks and all, and turned ourselves loose. About one
hundred shots were fired in quick succession. We then went up town to
note the effect.

Arriving at the billiard hall we found old "Uncle Jimmie," our man,
standing in the door laughing fit to kill himself. The hall was empty,
with the exception of a few who were still hid under tables, chairs,
etc. Most of them had gone out of the back door, there being a rough
canyon within a few yards of it leading to the mountains, right at the
marshal's heels. It was said that "Pinto Tom" didn't get in from the
mountains for two days, and when he did come, he swore he had been off
prospecting.

Shortly after New-Years some of our men arrived, bringing the news of
the "Kid's" capture, while the rest, Jim East and Tom Emory had
accompanied Garrett and Stuart to "Vegas" with the prisoners.

Stuart sent a letter by one of the boys, stating that he, East and
Emory, would be in the "Oaks" just as quick as they could get there,
after turning the prisoners over to the authorities in "Vegas."

So, knowing that we were destined to remain around the "Oaks" a week or
two at least, we pulled out in the mountains and camped, so as to save
expenses by letting our horses eat grass instead of hay.

That night, after the boys arrived and after we had moved camp out in
the timber, while seated around a blazing pinyon fire, Lon Chambers who
was a splendid single-handed talker, began relating how they captured
the "Kid," etc., which ran about this way, as near as I can remember:

     "After leaving you fellers we caught----. It began snowing that
     night, and kept it up for two or three days and nights.

     Arriving in Ft. Sumner, Garrett got word that the Kid and outfit
     would be in town that night from Los Potales, where the 'Kid's'
     ranch or cave was situated, so he secured a house near the road
     leading to 'Potales,' to secret his men in. He then kept a man out
     doors, on guard, watching the road.

     About ten o'clock that night, while we were all inside playing a
     five-cent game of poker, the guard opened the door and said,
     'Garrett, here comes a crowd down the road!' We all dashed out,
     winchesters in hand, and hid behind an adobe fence, close by, which
     they would be compelled to pass.

     The moon was shining and we could tell who it was, or at least
     Garrett and Mason could; they being well acquainted with them.
     There was six in the approaching crowd, and thirteen of us.

     When they rode up within speaking distance Garrett yelled, 'throw
     up your hands!' His voice had hardly died out when thirteen shots
     from our nervously gripped winchesters were fired into their midst.

     When the smoke cleared off we found that they had all vanished,
     with the exception of Tom Ophalliard who was mortally wounded, and
     died shortly after. He had several bullet holes through his body.
     'These,' pointing down to his feet, 'are his over shoes, and this'
     pulling off a finely finished mexican sombraro and displaying it,
     "is the hat I pulled from his head before he had quit kicking."

     The next morning we struck out on the trail which led back towards
     Los Potales. The white snow along the trail was red with blood,
     having flowed from the wounds in Rudabaugh's horse. The poor animal
     died though after carrying his heavy master through twelve miles of
     deep snow.

     About midnight we hove in sight of a little rock house standing on
     the banks of a small arroyo. The trail led right up to the door
     which faced the south. Right near the door stood four shivering
     horses.

     Knowing we had the little band trapped, we took things cool until
     daylight, when we stationed ourselves around the house.

     There being no opening in the building except the door, Garrett and
     Lee Hall crawled up to the end wall so they could watch the door
     from around the corner, while the rest of us concealed ourselves
     behind knolls, etc.

     We had left our horses behind a hill quite a distance from the
     house.

     When it became light enough to see, Charlie Bowdre stepped out
     doors to see about his horse, but he hadn't more than hit the
     ground when two bullets, fired by Garrett and Hall, who were still
     at the corner not a dozen feet from the door, sent him to his long
     home. He only uttered a few words, which were: 'I wish, I wish,'
     before his last breath left him.

     Of course that caused a stirring around inside; they knew what it
     meant and began making preparations for an escape. The 'Kid' had
     his pony inside, out of the cold and the other four--Rudabaugh
     having secured another one--were tied to the door frame so that
     they could reach the ropes without exposing their bodies. Now
     thought they if we can pull three of the horses inside we will
     mount and make a bold dash out of the door. But when they got the
     first animal about half way into the house Garrett sent a bullet
     through its heart. The dead animal of course blocked the way so
     that they had to give up that scheme.

     They then tried picking port holes through the thick rock walls,
     but had to give it up also, as they had nothing to do it with but
     their knives and firearms.

     The 'Kid' and Garrett finally opened up a conversation. The former
     seemed to be in fine humor. Every now and then he would crack some
     kind of a joke and then laugh, so that every one of us could hear
     him. At one time he asked in a jovial way: 'Garrett, have you got a
     fire out there?' 'Yes, a good one!' was the answer. 'Can we come
     out and warm if we behave ourselves?' 'Yes,' replied Garrett, 'but
     come with your hands up.' 'Oh, you go to h--l, won't you? You old
     long-legged s--n of a b----h!'

     You see they were without fire, water or provisions, consequently
     we had the advantage. We had a good fire out behind one of the
     knolls and would take turns about, during the day and coming
     night, going to warm.

     They held out until next day, when they surrendered, after being
     promised protection from mob violence. Kid was the last man to come
     out with his hands up. He said he would have starved to death
     before surrendering if the rest had stayed with him."

Chambers, after finishing gave a heavy sigh and wondered whether Garrett
and Stuart would act white and whack up the reward evenly among the
whole outfit, or not.

"Bob" and I made arrangements with the boys to loan us their part of the
reward, which would amount to considerable over a hundred dollars
apiece, until we got back to the ranch, to pay our debts with.




CHAPTER XXIII.

A TRIP TO THE RIO GRANDE ON A MULE.


About the time we were getting out of patience waiting, the two boys,
East and Emory, arrived with the good news that Stuart would be along in
a few days, he having to remain over to get their part of the reward,
etc.

Stuart arrived finally; he came in a buggy with a gentleman from
"Vegas." His orders to Roberson and Torry's men were: "Boys, you fellows
pull right back to the ranch, as I have got some important business to
look after in 'Vegas.' We can come back after those cattle in the
spring," etc.

The boys who had helped capture the "Kid" and outfit rounded him up for
their part of the reward, but he said it was already spent. Oh no, they
wasn't mad! Some of them swore that he would be a corpse before morning.
But luckily for him he pulled for "Vegas" that night. I am not certain
whether he was aware of his danger or not, but there is one thing I am
certain of and that is, it wouldn't have been healthy for him to remain
in that locality very long. "Bob" had even consented to the crowd
hanging him. I was the only one who protested, for the simple reason
that I do not believe in mob law. Of course I thought it very wrong in
swindling the boys out of equal share of the reward, after they had
shared equally in the danger and hardships.

"Bob" was in a bad fix, in debt, no money and ordered home, by one whose
orders his boss had told him to obey. The question was, how to stand his
creditors off and get grub, corn, etc. enough to last him home.

I finally came to his rescue. As I intended remaining, I went to the
merchants and told them his fix and guaranteed that he would send the
money he owed as soon as he got home, or else I would let them take it
out of my four mules and wagon, which were worth a thousand dollars at
least.

They let him off; also let him have grub, corn, etc. enough to last him
home, which would take fifteen days to make the trip.

As some of my boys became homesick, on seeing Roberson's outfit getting
ready to pull back and as I was anxious to cut down expenses, knowing
that I would have to lay there the rest of the winter, waiting for
money to pay up my bills before the merchants would let me move my
wagon, I let three of them go along with "Bob." Those three were James
East, Cal. Pope and Lee Hall. "Bob" let Tom Emory, one of his men, who
was stuck on the light mountain air of New Mexico remain with me. This
left me there with a cook and three warriors, Emory, Chambers and
"Big-foot" Wallace.

Just as soon as "Bob" had pulled out, I moved into town and rented a
house, so that we could put on style, while waiting for the money I had
written to the ranch for.

The mails were so irregular, on account of the deep snow which lay on
the ground up there in the mountains nearly all winter, that I didn't
get a letter from Moore for three weeks. In the letter were drafts for
three hundred dollars; and Moore stated that I had done just right by
not taking Stuart's advice and coming home. He also reminded me that I
mustn't come back until I got the cattle, if it took two years; and also
that I must scour out the Sand hills on the Plains around Las Potales,
"Kid's" den, on my return. I distributed the three hundred dollars among
my creditors and then wrote back to the ranch for some more, as that was
already gone, etc.

We found the citizens of White Oaks to be sociable and kind; and
everything went on lovely with the exception of a shooting scrape
between a School teacher and "Big foot."

About the last of February I received another three hundred dollars and
I then struck out, accompanied by Tom Emory, to hunt the noted Pat
Cohglin and find out if he would let us have the cattle without
bloodshed or not. As he had a slaughter house in Fort Stanton I struck
out for there first.

We left the "Oaks" one morning early, Emory mounted on his pet "Grey"
and I on one of the fat work mules and arrived in "Stanton" about
sundown.

We rode up to Cohglin's slaughter pen the first thing and found a man by
the name of Peppen in charge. On examining the hides which hung on the
fence we found five bearing the "L. X." brand. I laid them to one side
and next morning brought two men Crawford and Hurly, down from the Post
to witness the brands. I then told Mr. Peppen, or "Old Pap" as he was
called, not to butcher any more of those cattle sold by "Billy the Kid."
He promised he wouldn't unless he got new orders from Cohglin.

From there we pulled for Tulerosa where Cohglin lived. The first night
out we stopped at the Mescalero Apache Indian Agency, which is known as
South Fork. There I learned from the storekeeper of a bunch of eight
hundred cattle having passed there in a terrible hurry, about three
weeks before, going west. He said that they were undoubtedly stolen
cattle, for they drove night and day through the deep snow. I came to
the conclusion that maybe it was Tom Cooper, one of "Kid's" right-hand
bowers with a stolen herd of Panhandle cattle, so made up my mind to
keep on his trail.

We rode into Tulerosa the next evening about sundown. A young man from
the Panhandle, by the name of Sam Coleman, who was on his way to
Willcox, Arizona, was with us. We found the town to be a genuine mexican
"Plaza" of about one thousand souls. We put up for the night at
Cohglin's store and learned from the clerk, Morris, that the "King of
Tulerosa," as Cohglin was called, was down on the Rio Grande on trail of
a bunch of cattle stolen from him by Tom Cooper. I put that down as a
very thin yarn, having reasons to believe that he and Cooper stood in
with one another. I made up my mind that it was our cattle he was
trying to get away with, after hearing of us being in the "Oaks."

The clerk had told the truth though, for he was after Cooper. The way it
happened, Cohglin had only paid Cooper and the "Kid" half down on the
last bunch of Panhandle cattle he bought from them and Cooper hearing of
"Kid's" capture and of us being in the "Oaks" on our way after the
cattle, came onto Cohglin for the rest of the money so he could leave
the country. On being refused he got his crowd together and stole three
hundred head of the latter's best cattle and pulled for Arizona with
them.

After supper Emory and Coleman went to bed while I struck out to a
mexican dance, at the outskirts of town, to keep my ears open for news
connected with Panhandle cattle, etc.

There being plenty of wine, or "mescal," on the ground the "Greasers"
began feeling pretty good about midnight. Of course I had to join in
their sports, so as to keep on the good side of them. There was only one
American in the crowd, besides myself.

I became pretty intimate with one old fellow of whom I made scores of
inquiries in regard to Mr. Cohglin and the herd--the one I heard about
at South Fork--that had passed there a few weeks before.

He knew nothing of the herd, no further than having seen it, but he
pointed out a long-haired "Greaser," who was three sheets in the wind
and swinging his pistol around on his fore-finger, who could tell me all
about it, as he had piloted it through San Augustine Pass.

I learned that the herd was owned by Charlie Slaughter and that their
destination was the Heeley River, near Tombstone, Arizona.

Marking out a lot of brands which I had never heard of on a piece of
paper, I asked the long-haired fellow if he noticed any of them on the
cattle. He did not. So I then marked off a lot of Panhandle brands. He
picked out several, the "L X." among them, this time, that he remembered
of seeing in the herd. This satisfied me that the herd would bear
inspection.

The next morning I told Emory what the old mexican had said and that my
intentions were to kill two birds with one stone; find Cohglin and then
follow the herd.

This didn't impress Emory very favorably. He advised me to return and
get the wagon and outfit. I couldn't see the point, for we would lose
at least a week by the operation. He took the back track while I
continued single handed, accompanied by Sam Coleman, whose route was the
same as mine until arriving on the Rio Grande, where he would change his
course to southward.




CHAPTER XXIV.

WAYLAID BY UNKNOWN PARTIES.


After leaving Tulerosa our route lay across a young desert, called the
"White Sands," a distance of sixty miles. That night Sam and I camped at
a lonely spot called "White Water," where there wasn't a stick of wood
in sight. We had to make a fire out of a bush called the "oil weed" to
keep warm by.

The next night we put up with an old man by the name of Shedd, who kept
a ranch on the east side of Osscuro mountains, near San Augustine Pass.

On arriving in the Pass next morning, on our way to Las Cruces, we could
see the whole Rio Grande valley, dotted with green fields, for at least
a hundred miles up and down. And by looking over our shoulder, in the
direction we had come, we could see the white looking plain or desert,
which extends for two hundred miles north and south. It was indeed a
beautiful sight, to one who had just come from a snowy country, and we
were loath to leave the spot.

Arriving in Las Cruces, (City of the Crosses) on the Rio Grande,
twenty-five miles from Shedd's where we had left that morning, I went to
making inquiries about Mr. Pat Cohglin's whereabouts. I found out by the
Postmaster, Cunnifee, who was an intimate friend of his that he was in
El Paso, Texas, fifty miles below, and would be up to "Cruces" the next
day.

That night Sam and I proceeded to take in the town, which was booming,
on account of the A. T. and S. F. R. R. being only forty miles above,
and on its way down the river to El Paso.

The next morning Sam bid me adieu and struck out on his journey for
Willcox, Arizona, about two hundred miles distant.

That evening Mr. Cohglin, whom I found to be a large, portly looking
half-breed Irishman, drove up to Mr. Cunnifee's store in a buggy drawn
by a fine pair of black horses.

I introduced myself as having been sent from the Panhandle after the
cattle he had purchased from the "Kid." He at first said I couldn't have
them, but finally changed his tone, when I told him that I had a crowd
at White Oaks, and that my instructions were to take them by force if I
couldn't secure them in any other way.

He then began giving me "taffy," as I learned afterwards. He promised
faithfully that, as he didn't like to have his whole herd, which was
scattered through the whole White Mountain district, disturbed at that
season of the year, if I would wait until the first of April, at which
time the new grass would be up, he would help me round-up every hoof of
Panhandle cattle on his range. I agreed to do so providing he would
promise not to have any more of them butchered at "Stanton."

The old fellow was worried considerably about the three hundred head of
cattle Cooper had stolen from him. He told me about having followed him
with a crowd of mexicans into the Black Range, near the Arizona line,
where he succeeded in getting back a few of the broken-down ones.

There being a fellow by the name of "Hurricane Bill," of Ft. Griffin,
Texas notoriety, in town, direct from Tombstone, Arizona, I concluded to
lay over a few days and "play in" with him and his gang of four or five,
in hopes of learning something about Slaughter and his herd, the one I
was on trail of.

I went under an assumed name and told them that I was on the "dodge" for
a crime committed in Southern Texas.

I found out all about their future plans from one of the gang, by the
name of Johnson, who seemed to be more talkative than the rest. He said
they were waiting for the railroad to get to El Paso; and then they were
going into the butchering business on a large scale. He wanted me to
join them; and said the danger wouldn't be very great, as they intended
stealing the cattle mostly from ignorant mexicans.

One morning while Johnson and I were eating breakfast at a restaurant a
man sat down at the same table and, recognizing me, said: "Hello,"
calling me by name; "where did you come from?" He then continued;
although I winked at him several times to keep still, "So you fellows
succeeded in capturing Billy the Kid, did you?" etc.

Johnson gave a savage glance at me as much as to say: d----m you, you
have been trying to work us, have you? I kept my hand near old colts
"45" for I expected, from his nervous actions, for him to make a break
of some kind. He finally got up and walked out without saying a word.
This man who had so suddenly bursted our friendship was a friend of
Frank Stuart's and had met me in Las Vegas, with his chum, Stuart.

I concluded it wouldn't be healthy for me to remain there till after
dark, nor to undertake the trip to Tombstone, for I had manifested such
an interest in the Slaughter herd, etc., that they might follow me up,
on hearing that I had left town. So I wrote a letter to Mr. Moore,
telling him of the whole circumstances, and asking him if I had better
take my men and follow the herd to the jumping-off place or not? I then
struck back to White Oaks over the same route I had come.

That night I stopped at Shedd's ranch; and so did Cohglin, he being on
his way back to Tulerosa.

The next day I rode the entire sixty miles, across the "white sands,"
and landed in Tulerosa about a half hour behind Cohglin and his fast
steppers. I was tired though, and swore off ever riding another mule on
a long trip. I had figured on being in mountains all the time, where I
would have lots of climbing to do, is why I rode the mule instead of a
horse.

The next morning I made up my mind that I would take a new route to the
"Oaks" by going around the mountains through Mr. Cohglin's range which
was on Three Rivers, twenty odd miles north. So before starting I
inquired of Cohglin's clerk as to the best route, etc.

I stopped at the Cohglin ranch that night and was treated like a white
head by Mr. Nesbeth and wife who took care of the ranch, that is, done
the cooking, gardening, milking, etc. The herders, or cowboys, were all
mexicans, with the exception of Bill Gentry, the boss, who was away at
the time.

While getting ready to start for White Oaks next morning one of the
eight or ten, mexicans, who were sitting on the fence sunning
themselves, came to me, and told me of a near cut to the "Oaks," by
taking an old Indian trail over the White Mountains, and advised me to
take that route as I could save at least twenty miles, it being forty
around by the road.

Mr. Nesbeth spoke up and said it would be better for me to travel on the
road, even if it was further, as I might experience some difficulty in
finding the old Indian trail, etc.

The "Greaser" then offered me his service, saying that he would go and
put me on the trail so that it would be impossible for me to miss my
way. I agreed, so he mounted a pony and we rode east up a rough canyon.

A ride of about five miles brought us to the almost obliterated trail.
It lead up an awful brushy and rocky canyon towards the snowy crags of
the White Mountain range.

About an hour after bidding the "Greaser" adieu, I came to where the
trail made a short curve to the left, but I could tell from the lay of
the ground that, by keeping straight ahead, I would strike it again. So
I left it, and luckily for me that I did, for there was some one laying
for me not far from there.

I hadn't gone but a rod or two when bang! bang! bang! went three shots
in quick succession, not over fifty yards to the left; and at the same
time my mule gave a lunge forward, on the ice-covered stones, and fell
broad-side, throwing me over a precipice about eight feet to the bottom.
My winchester and pistol both were hanging to the saddle-horn, but I
managed to grab and pull the latter out of the scabbard as I went off,
and took it with me.

The first thing I done on striking bottom was to hunt a hole. I found a
nice little nook between two boulders and lay there with cocked pistol,
expecting every second to see three Indians or "Greasers" peep over the
ledge on the hunt for a dead "Gringo"--as the mexicans call an American.

After waiting a few minutes I became impatient and crawled on top of a
small knoll and, on looking in the direction the shooting had come from,
I got a faint glimpse of what I took to be two half-stooped human forms
retreating, through the pinyon brush, at a lively gait. Suffice it to
say I found my mule standing in a grove of trees, with his front feet
fastened in the bridle-reins, about two hundred yards from where he
fell. And between his forelegs, on the ground was a small pool of
sparkling red blood, which had dripped from a slight bullet wound in his
breast.

On examination I found that one bullet had cut a groove in the hind tree
of my saddle, and another had plowed through a pair of blankets tied
behind the saddle. I arrived in the Oaks, on my almost broken-down mule
about dark that night, after an absence of nearly two weeks.




CHAPTER XXV.

LOST ON THE STAKED PLAINS.


About a week after my return to White Oaks, I received a letter from Mr.
Moore stating that I need not go to Arizona to look after the Slaughter
herd as he had hired a United States Deputy Marshal by the name of John
W. Poe, now Sheriff of Lincoln County, New Mexico, to go around by rail
and tend to the matter. But when Poe arrived there the herd had been
sold and driven to Old Mexico, so that we never knew whether there were
any Panhandle cattle in it or not, except what I learned from the
mexican, which appeared to me very good evidence, that there were.

On the tenth day of March, while taking it easy waiting for the first of
April to arrive so that we could round up the Cohglin range according to
agreement, I received a confidential letter from Mr. Geo. Nesbeth of the
Cohglin ranch, giving me a broad hint that Mr. Cohglin was getting rid
of our cattle as fast as possible, before the first of April should
arrive.

The letter arrived in the evening and next morning I took "Big foot"
along and struck out for "Stanton"--after giving Chambers and Emory
orders to load up the wagon with grub and corn, and follow.

"Big-foot" and I arrived in the Post about three o'clock in the
afternoon and went through the Cohglin slaughter pens, finding several
freshly butchered "L. X." hides, which went to show that I had been
duped, and that the hint from Nesbeth was true. We then rode down the
"Bonetta" River nine miles to Lincoln, to go through the hides there and
to look for a herd we expected the old fellow had hidden out somewhere
along the river.

We stopped in "Stanton" that night and next morning struck out on the
White Oaks road to meet the wagon and turn it towards Three Rivers.

We met the outfit at the mouth of Nogal canyon and camped for dinner.

It was sixty miles around by the road to Cohglin's ranch, the route the
wagon would have to go and about twenty-five or thirty on a straight
line over the White Mountains.

After dinner "Big-foot" and I struck out over the mountains, while Emory
and Chambers went around by the road to pilot the cook, etc.

About twelve o'clock that night, after a very hard ride over one of the
roughest strips of snow covered countries a man ever saw, we arrived at
the Cohglin ranch.

We found the corral full of cattle, but, being very dark, couldn't tell
whose they were.

Mr. and Mrs. Nesbeth got up out of bed and gave us a cold supper; and he
also gave us a few pointers in regard to his employer's doings, etc. He
informed me that Bill Gentry, the boss, had just began, that day,
gathering the remaining Panhandle cattle, that might still be left on
the range, to take to the "Stanton" slaughter pens. Hence those cattle
in the corral.

After breakfast Gentry and his seven "Greasers" turned the herd out of
the corral with the intention of keeping right on with his work. There
was only five head of "L. X.'s," all large steers, in the bunch and I
told Gentry that I would have to take charge of those and also gather up
the rest that were on his range. He couldn't agree to that, he said, for
his orders from Cohglin were, not to give up any of the Panhandle
cattle, etc. I told him that I didn't care what his orders were, as I
was bound to have the cattle.

Just about the time we were arguing the case the rest of my outfit hove
in sight; they had been traveling all night.

After camping the wagon we all went out to the herd, which the mexicans
were guarding and proceeded to cutting our five head out. Gentry tried
to get me to wait until he could send for Cohglin, he having already
dispatched a mexican to Tulerosa after him, but I wouldn't reason the
matter at all, as I was mad about the way I had been served.

We went right to work after cutting out the five head, rounding up the
whole range in search of more, but after three days hard work we only
succeeded in finding three head more. But we left there with nine head,
the ninth one being one of Cohglin's own steers which we butchered in
the Oaks on our arrival back there, for the benefit of our many friends
whom had been depending on us all winter for their fresh beef. Thus I
had the satisfaction of getting even with the old fellow to the extent
of one steer and a fat hog which we had butchered and stowed away in
the wagon the night before leaving.

The mexican that Gentry sent to Tulerosa with the dispatch had to go on
down to Las Cruces, on the Rio Grande, Cohglin having started down there
the day before; hence we not having the old fellow to contend with.

After looking over the "Carezo" range, which was owned by Catron and
Waltz and several small mexican ranges, we pulled into White Oaks with
lots of experience but very few cattle.

On arriving in the "Oaks" I wrote to Mr. Moore telling him all about the
way in which Cohglin had taken advantage of me, etc. Also advised him to
have the old fellow prosecuted as I had sufficient evidence to send him
to the "Pen," etc.

Mr. Moore on getting my letter, sent John Poe, the United States Deputy
Marshal that he had sent to Tombstone, Arizona, over to have Cohglin
arrested and put through the mill.

On leaving the "Oaks" for good, I bought a wagon load of corn, chuck,
etc. for which I gave orders on the "L. X." company, not having any
money left. The merchants had by this time, become acquainted with me,
so that my name to an order was just the same as cash to them.

From the "Oaks" I pulled due east, around the "Capitan" mountains to
Roswell on the Pecos River. I overhauled scores of little mexican
ranches scattered through the mountains on my route, but failed to find
any of our stock. At Roswell though we found two large steers which
swelled our little herd to ten head.

From Roswell we went to John Chisholm's ranch on the head of South
Spring River; and got there just in time as he was rigging up his outfit
for spring work. They were going to start down the Reo Pecos to the
Texas line, next day, to begin work and I concluded we had better work
with them, in search of Panhandle cattle which might have drifted across
the Plains.

I took my outfit back to Roswell, five miles, where I made arrangements
with Capt. J. C. Lea, who kept a store, to board one of my men whom I
wanted to leave there to take care of the ten head of steers until my
return, not caring to drive them two hundred miles down the river and
then back again.

Not having grub enough to last on the trip I bought a supply from the
accommodating Capt. Lea, who took my note for pay. He also sold me two
horses on the same terms.

We were absent two weeks on this trip, but failed to find any of our
cattle. We came back with the satisfaction though of knowing that there
wasn't any in that part of the world.

On our arrival back to Roswell we learned of the "Kid's" escape from
Lincoln after having killed his two guards. That night Lon Chambers wore
a different hat; he had swapped his star-spangled mexican sombraro off
to one of Chisholm's men. This hat had been presented to Tom O'Phalliard
by the "Kid," hence Chambers not wanting it in his possession for fear
he might run across the "Kid." Chambers of course denied the above,
saying that he never thought of such a thing, but traded it off just
because it, being so heavy, made his head ache. But that was too thin we
thought under the circumstances. Any of us would have done the same
though, no doubt, knowing that the "Kid" had sworn vengeance against all
of O'Phalliard's "murderers" as he termed them.

We found Emory and the ten steers doing finely. Tom hated to see us back
for he was having such a soft time. All he had to do was turn the
steers out of the corral, mornings, and then round-up and pen them at
night again.

After drawing on the whole-souled Capt. Lea again for more grub, etc.,
we pulled up the Reo Pecos--looking through all the cattle on our
route--to Ft. Sumner, a distance of one hundred miles.

We laid over in Sumner two days and went to a mexican fandango both
nights, at the Maxwell mansion in which the "Kid" was killed shortly
afterwards. The "Kid" was in the building while the dance was going on
but we didn't know it at the time. The way I found it out, I had
escorted a young woman, after the dance, one night, to her room, which
was in the same building as the dance, and she bid me good night without
asking me in. I thought it strange but never said anything. That fall
when I came back there she explained matters, by saying that the "Kid"
was in her room at the time, reading. I had noticed that she stood
outside of the door until I had turned the corner out of sight. She also
explained that: The "Kid" had the door locked and she had to give a
private rap to get him to open it.

From Ft. Sumner we pulled due east on the Los Potales road, on our way
to scour out the "Sand Hills" according to Moore's instruction in one
of his letters to me at White Oaks. Before leaving the Post, the last
settlement or store that we would come to before reaching the Canadian
River, I sold one of the horses bought from Capt. Lea, for thirty-five
dollars and laid in a small supply of grub with the money. Not being
acquainted there my credit wasn't good, hence having to sell the horse.

Two days out from Ft. Sumner we came to the little rock house, at
Stinking Springs, where the "Kid" and his companions held out so long
without fire, food or water. Chambers and Emory of course had to explain
and point out every place of interest, to "Big-foot Wallace," the
mexican cook, Frank, or Francisco, and myself.

The second day after leaving Stinking Springs, we came to the "Kid's"
noted "Castle" at Los Potales, on the western edge of the great "Llano
Estacado."

Los Potales is a large alkali Lake, the water of which is unfit for man
or beast. But on the north side of the lake is two nice, cool springs
which gurgle forth from a bed of rock, near the foot of "Kid's"
Castle--a small cave in the cliff. In front of the cave is a stone
corral about fifty feet square; and above the cave on the level plain
is several hitching posts. Outside of those things mentioned there is
nothing but a level prairie just as far as the eye can reach.

We found about one hundred head of cattle, mostly from the Canadian
River, but a few from as far north as Denver Col., at "Potales," which
improved the appearance of our little herd considerably.

From there we went to the Coyote lake, twelve miles further east, where
we found about fifty head more cattle, a mixed lot like the first. They
were almost as wild as deer.

We then pulled into the Sand Hills, which extend over a scope of country
from ten to fifty miles wide, and two hundred long--that is, two hundred
miles north and south.

After about ten days hard work we came out onto the Plains again, our
herd having increased to about twenty-five hundred head. We were
undoubtedly a worn out crowd--horses and all. To do that amount of work
we should have had at least five more men, and three or four more horses
apiece. We only had one horse apiece, besides one extra, and the four
work mules, which we had to press into double duty by using them to
guard the cattle at night.

The next day about noon, after getting out of the Sand Hills, we came to
a buffalo-hunter's camp on the head of Yellow-house canyon, a tributary
to the Brazos River. There was one man in camp, the other one being away
on a hunt. Our cattle being nearly dead for water, there being none
there, with the exception of a small spring, just large enough to allow
one animal to drink at a time, I asked the hunter to give me directions
to the nearest water from there, on our route.

Pointing to a cluster of sand hills about fifteen miles to the east, he
said: "You will find Running Water, the head of Canyon Blanco, just
eight miles east of those sand hills." As we learned, after it was too
late, he should have said; eight miles _north_ of the sand hills,
instead of _east_. We were all acquainted with the country from Running
Water north, but had never been south of it; hence us having to depend
on the "locoed" buffalo-hunter's directions.

We camped for the night within a few miles of the sand hills. The cattle
were restless all night, on account of being thirsty, which caused us
all to lose sleep and rest.

The next morning, after eating a hasty breakfast, we let the moaning
herd string out towards the big red sun which was just making its
appearance.

Giving the boys orders to keep headed east, and telling the cook to
follow behind the herd with his wagon, I struck out ahead on my tired
and weak pony, Croppy, to find the water, which was "so near, and yet so
far."

I rode about fifteen miles, and still no water. I then dismounted to
wait for the herd to come in sight, but changed my notion and galloped
on five miles further, thinking maybe the hunter might have meant
eighteen miles instead of eight. The five miles was reached and still
nothing but a dry, level plain, with no indications of water ahead, as
far as I could see.

Thinking maybe I had bore too far to the south, I then rode five or six
miles to the north, but with the same result. I then, after letting
Croppy blow awhile started back towards the herd at a slow gait.

Finally a cloud of dust appeared, and shortly after, the herd hove in
sight. The poor cattle were coming in a trot, their tongues hanging out
a foot.

The way the boys cursed and abused that poor old hunter, at a distance,
was a sin, after I had told them of our luck. Chambers wanted to go
right back and eat the poor "locoed" human up alive without salt or
pepper. But I pacified him by saying that maybe he had made a mistake of
a few miles, meant eighty instead of eight. At any rate we continued
right on, east.

About noon our ten-gallon keg run dry, and then we began to feel
ticklish, scared, or whatever you wish to call it. But about three
o'clock, we spied a bunch of mustangs off to the right, about five
miles, and on galloping over to where they had been, before seeing me, I
found a small pool of muddy rain water, which they had been wallowing
in.

After letting Croppy fill up, and eating a drink of the muddy stuff
myself, I struck back to let the other boys come on and fill up; also
sent the cook to fill the keg, and to water his mules, I kept the herd,
they being anxious to travel in search of water, pointed east, by
myself, while the rest of the boys were absent.

We traveled till midnight and then pitched camp to get something to eat.
After getting supper cooked, it was almost an impossibility to find
time to eat it, as the herd kept milling and trotting around like so
many crazy animals.

We remained there all night, and next morning used the last drop of
water to make coffee. We found the keg, after draining it, to be about
half full of solid mud.

I concluded that we had gone far enough east, so, that morning changed
our course to north.

About eleven o'clock, while the hot June sun was coming down with
vengeance, we struck a large lake about a mile wide. If ever a crowd was
happy it was us. The poor cattle drank till some of them fell down and
was unable to move.

We laid there resting up until the next day after dinner. Our grub had
given out by this time, therefore we had nothing to eat but coffee and
beef "straight."

When we left the lake our course was due north.

About noon the next day we came to the head of Canyon Blanco, twelve
miles below Running Water, consequently we turned west, and traveled
twelve miles up the dry canyon before pitching camp.

From there we turned due north again and traveled two days before
striking any more water.

On arriving at Terra Blanco, fifty miles south of the Canadian river we
struck Mr. Summerfield, and his outfit, from whom we borrowed grub
enough to last us home. There were also two "L. X." boys in the
Summerfield camp, and they, having five good horses apiece, divided with
us. Our ponies were just about completely peetered out.

We landed at the "L. X." ranch on the 22nd day of June, with the herd of
twenty-five hundred head of cattle, after having been absent just seven
months, to a day.




CHAPTER XXVI.

A TRIP DOWN THE REO PECOS.


On my return I found that the "L. X." ranch had changed bosses. Moore
had quit and bought a ranch of his own, while John Hollicott, one of the
old hands had been put in his place. Hence in the future I had to be
governed by Mr. Hollicott's orders--that is while working around the
ranch. One of the firm, Erskine Clement, had charge of outside matters,
now, since Moore had left.

I put in the summer running a branding outfit, loafing around Tascosa,
working up a cattle stealing case, etc., until the middle of October,
when Clement received a letter from John Poe, who was prosecuting
Cohglin, stating for Chambers and I to come over to Lincoln as witnesses
in the Cohglin case. The time set for us to be there, was on the 7th day
of November, therefore we had no time to lose, it being five hundred
miles over there, by the shortest route.

Hollicott and Clement talked the matter over and concluded that I had
better not come back until the next spring--"just put in the winter
drifting over the country, wherever you can do the most good," was my
orders.

Chambers and I struck out from Tascosa on the 22nd of October. He had
only one horse, while I had two of the best animals on the ranch, Croppy
and Buckshot.

We traveled up the river to Liberty, New Mexico, and from there cut
across the Staked Plains to Ft. Sumner, on the Reo Pecos.

The distance from "Sumner" to the "Oaks" was about one hundred miles on
a bee line across the country, while it was one hundred and fifty around
by the road. We chose the former route, although we were told that there
wasn't any water until reaching the Capitan mountains within thirty
miles of the "Oaks." We both wished though, that we had followed the
road, for, our progress being very slow on account of the loose dirt
which would give away under a horse, allowing him to sink almost to his
knees, we came very near perishing from thirst; and so did our poor
horses.

We landed in White Oaks about noon of the fourth day out from Ft.
Sumner; and had been on the road twelve days from Tascosa. We were
welcomed back to the "Oaks" by all of our old acquaintances, especially
those whom we had furnished with stolen beef all winter.

As we had five days to loaf in, before court set in, we went to work
prospecting for gold, every body in the town being at fever heat over
recent rich strikes.

The first day was spent in climbing to the top of Baxter mountain, where
most of the rich mines were located, and back. The only thing we found
of interest was a lot of genuine oyster shells imbedded in a large rock
on the extreme top of the mountain. Of course this brought up a
discussion as to how they came there. Chambers contended that they grew
there during the flood, and I argued that they were there before God
made the earth. We both finally got mad, each one, over the other's weak
argument, and began to slide down hill towards town, which looked
something like a checkerboard from where we were.

The next day we tied the pick and shovel behind our saddles and struck
out on horseback to prospect in the valleys. At last we struck it, a
fine gold bearing lead. It cropped out of the ground about a foot. I
told Chambers to go to work and dig the prospect-hole, while I wrote out
the location notices.

Finally an old miner by the name of Stone came to us. I was sitting
under the shade of a pinyon tree writing, while Chambers was sweating
like a "Nigger at election." "What are you fellows trying to do?" spoke
up Mr. Stone, after grinning a few moments. We told him. He then said:
"Why neither one of you fellows has got as much sense as a last year's
bird's nest; that's nothing but a very common ledge of rock." We took
him at his word and went back to town.

That night Mr. Stone gave us one of his mines, if we would sink a twenty
foot shaft on it. We done so; that is, Chambers did, while I carried
water, and rode into town every day at noon to bring him out his dinner.

Finally our time was out and we had to pull for Lincoln, a distance of
thirty-five miles. Poe had written to me to come in after night, and on
the sly, as he wanted to make Cohglin believe that we wouldn't be there
to appear against him, so he would let his trial come off, instead of
taking a change of venue. I left Croppy in a feed stable to be taken
care of until my return.

Arriving in Lincoln, Poe sent us down the Reo Bonetta, twelve miles, to
stop with a Mr. Cline, with whom he had made arrangements, until sent
for.

Mr. Cline was a Dutchman who had married a mexican wife and had a house
full of little half-breeds around him.

Time passed off very slowly to Chambers and I, although our host tried
to amuse us by telling his hairbreadth escapes from wild indians and
grizzly-bears.

We were indeed glad when Mr. Poe rode up, after we had been at the Cline
ranch twelve days, and told us that we were free. Cohglin had "smelled a
mice" and taken a change of venue to Mesilla, in Dona Anna County.

Before leaving Lincoln I had to sign a five hundred dollar bond for my
appearance in Mesilla, as a witness against Cohglin, on the first Monday
in April, 1882, which was the following spring. Mr. Chambers being sworn
and not knowing anything of importance, was allowed to return home. We
both received ninety dollars apiece, for mileage and witness fees.

Returning to White Oaks, Chambers remained there a week, making love to
his mexican widow, and then struck for the "L. X." ranch, by way of
Anton Chico, and down the Canadian River. The route he and I had come
was too far between ranches for him, traveling alone.

I remained in the "Oaks" about a week after my "pard" had left, waiting
for some more money which I had written for.

From the "Oaks" I went to Roswell on the Reo Pecos, a distance of one
hundred and twenty-five miles, by the route I took. There I struck
company, a jovial old soul by the name of "Ash" Upson, who was just
starting to the Texas Pacific Railroad, two hundred miles down the
river, to meet Pat. Garrett, who had written to come there after him, in
a buggy. Ash was making his home at Garrett's ranch, a few miles from
Roswell.

We laid over Christmas day at the mouth of Seven Rivers and helped kind
Mrs. Jones, one of Mr. Upson's old-time friends, get away with a nice
turkey dinner.

While sitting around our camp-fire at nights "Old" Ash would amuse me by
relating circumstances connected with the "bloody Lincoln County war."
He also gave me a full sketch of "Billy the Kid's" life, a subject
which I am going to devote the next chapter to, as I imagine it will be
interesting reading to some.

We arrived at Pecos Station, on the T. P. R. R., one afternoon about
three o'clock. And it being a terribly lonesome place, we, after leaving
our horses and things in care of an old wolf hunter who promised to see
that the horses were well fed, boarded the west bound passenger train
for Toyah, a distance of twenty-two miles.

We put up at the Alverado House, in Toyah. It was kept by a man named
Newell, who had a pretty little fifteen-year old daughter, whose
sparkling eyes were too much for me; to use a western phrase, she broke
me all up on the first round.

After supper Ash went out to take in the town, while I remained in the
office exchanging glances with Miss Bulah.

It was New Year's eve and Mr. and Mrs. Newell were making preparations
for a ball to be given New Year's night.

Toyah was then one of those terrible wicked infant towns, it being only
a few months old and contained over a dozen saloons and gambling halls.

About midnight Ash got through taking in the town and came back to the
hotel. He was three sheets in the wind, but swore he hadn't drank
anything but "Tom and Jerry."

The next morning the town was full of railroaders, they having come in
to spend New Years. A grand shooting match for turkeys was advertised to
come off at ten o'clock, and everybody, railroaders and all, were
cleaning up their pistols, when Ash and I got up, we having slept till
about nine o'clock.

Miss Bulah made a remark, in my presence, that she wished someone would
win a fat turkey and give it to her. Now was my time to make a "mash,"
so I assured her that I would bring in a dozen or two and lay them at
her feet.

When the shooting commenced I was on hand and secured the ticket which
was marked number eleven. The tickets were sold at twenty-five cents
apiece, and if you killed the bird, you were entitled to a free shot
until you missed.

Mr. Miller, the Justice, was running the business for what money there
was in it. He had sent to Dallas, six hundred miles east, after the
turkeys, which had cost him three dollars apiece. Hence he had to
regulate the distance and everything so that there would be considerable
missing done.

Everything being ready, he placed the turkey in an iron box, with
nothing but its head visible and then set the box thirty-five yards from
the line. The shooting to be done with pistols "off hand."

Ten shots were fired and still Mr. turkey was casting shy glances
towards the large crowd of several hundred men. Mr. Miller wore a
pleasant smile, when he shouted number eleven.

I stepped forward trembling like an aspen leaf, for fear I would miss
and thereby fail to win Miss Bulah's admiration. I was afraid, should
the bullet miss its mark, that the few dozen birds would be all killed
before my time would come around again, there being so many men waiting
for a shot. At last I cut loose and off went the turkey's head, also Mr.
Miller's happy smile. You see he lacked "two bits" of getting cost for
the bird.

Another one was put up, and off went his head. This was too much for Mr.
Miller, two birds already gone and only two dollars and "six bits" in
the pot. He finally after humming and hawing awhile, said:

"Gentlemen, I don't like to weaken this early in the game, but you all
know I have got a large family to support and consequently I will have
to rule this young man out of the ring. He's too slick with a pistol to
have around a game of this kind anyway."

I hated to quit of course, but it was best, for I might have missed the
very next time, and as it was Bulah would think that I would have
carried out my promise if I had been allowed to keep on.

After that, during my stay on the T. P. R. R., I was called the "Turkey
shooter." Often while riding near the railroad track, maybe four or five
hundred miles from Toyah, some one would hail me from a passing train by
that name; and whenever I would ride into a town there was sure to be
some fellow on hand to point me out. They all knew me so well by my
horse, Croppy, he being milk white and both ears being off close up to
his head. He was indeed a notable animal, as well as a long, keen, good
one.

That night nearly everybody got drunk, old Ash excepted of course, as he
was already full. The ball was a grand success. The dancers on the
womens' side, were all married ladies, with the exception of Miss Bulah
and a Miss Lee; and those on the opposite side were a terribly mixed
mob, but mostly gamblers, horse thieves and cow boys. The railroaders
didn't take any stock in the ball. Maybe it was because there were so
many on the floor wearing six-shooters and bowie knives around their
waists.

It was indeed a grand sight next morning looking at black eyes and
swollen heads. Every Chinaman, there being a dozen or two living in
town, skipped for parts unknown that night. There was too many loose
bullets flying through the air to suit them; and it is said that the
"Pig-tails" have shunned Toyah ever since that New Year's night.

A few days after New Years a telegram came to Ash, from Garrett who had
arrived at Pecos Station stating: "Come on the first train as I am in a
hurry to get home." Ash got me to answer it as he, having drank too much
Tom and Jerry, was unable to walk to the Telegraph office. I sent the
following message: "Can't leave here; owe every man in town."

In a few minutes another one came, an answer to the one just sent,
stating: "If you don't come down on the morning train I will strike out
and leave you."

This one raised Ash's spunk, so he told me to write down just what he
told me, and then give it to the operator. I done as requested, which
ran thus: "Go to, hic, h--l, d---- you!"

The next evening, Garrett arrived on the west bound passenger, and next
morning, after paying a lot of saloon bills, etc., took old Ash back
with him.

I had, the day after New Year's, went down to the Pecos and brought my
ponies up to Toyah, therefore I took a little spin out into the country
to pass off the time, every now and then, or at least to look through a
few herds of cattle in that vicinity.

After spending about two weeks around Toyah, I struck out for Colorado
City, two hundred miles east. Of course I hated to part with Miss Bulah;
and so did Mr. Newell hate to part with me, for he was losing a good
cash boarder.

Illustration: "BILLY THE KID."




CHAPTER XXVII.

A TRUE SKETCH OF "BILLY THE KID'S" LIFE.


The cut on opposite page was taken from a photograph and represents the
"Kid" as he appeared before the artist after having just returned from a
long, tiresome raid; and the following sketch of his short but eventful
life was gleaned from himself, Ash Upson and others. The circumstance
connected with his death I got from the lips of John W. Poe, who was
with Garrett when he fired the fatal shot.

Billy Bonney, alias the "Kid" was born in New York City, November the
23rd, 1859; and at the age of ten he, in company with his mother and
step-father, Antrim, landed in the Territory of New Mexico.

Mr. Antrim, shortly after his arrival in the Territory, opened up a
restaurant in Santa Fe, the Capitol, and one of his boarders was the
jovial old Ash Upson, my informant, who was then interested in a
newspaper at that place.

Often when Ash was too busily engaged about his office to go to dinner,
Mrs. Antrim would send it by her little merry-eyed boy, Billy, who was
the pride of her life.

Finally Ash sold out and moved to Silver City, which was then booming on
account of its rich mines. And it wasn't long until Mr. Antrim followed
and opened up another eating house there, with Ash as a boarder again.
Thus it will be seen that my informant was just the same as one of the
family for quite a while.

The "Kid's" first man, as told to me by himself, was a negro soldier in
Ft. Union, whom he shot in self-defence.

His next killing was a young blacksmith in Silver City whom he killed in
a personal encounter, but not according to law, hence it was this scrape
that first caused him to become an outcast; driven from pillar to post,
out of reach of a kind mother's influence.

It was a cold stormy night when he, after kissing his mother's pale
cheeks for the last time on this earth, rode out into the darkness,
headed west for the wilds of Arizona, where he soon became an adept at
cards and horse stealing.

He finally landed in the City of Chihuahua, Old Mexico, with a pocket
full of Arizona gold. Here he led a gay life until one night when a
bullet from his trusty revolver sent a rich mexican monte-dealer to his
long and happy home.

The next we hear of him is in the friendly land of Texas, where he
remained in retirement until the spring of 1876, when he drifted across
the lonely Gandalupe mountains into Lincoln County, New Mexico, then the
outlaw's Paradise.

At Lincoln, the county seat, he hired out as a cow boy to a young
Englishman by the name of Tunstall.

In the spring of '78 Mr. Tunstall was killed by a mob, headed by a
fellow named Morton, from the Reo Pecos.

The "Kid" hearing of his employer's foul murder, rode into Lincoln from
the Tunstall ranch to learn the full particulars concerning the killing.
He and the young Englishman were warm friends and before leaving the
ranch he swore vengeance against every one of the murderers.

Arriving in the mexican Plaza of Lincoln the "Kid" learned that Morton
and crowd had pulled back to the Reo Pecos. So he joined a crowd
composed of the following named parties: R. M. Bruer, J. G. Skurlock,
Charlie Bowder, Henry Brown, Frank McNab, Fred Wayt, Sam Smith, Jim
French, McClosky and Johnny Middleton, and started in pursuit. This was
just the beginning of the "bloody Lincoln County war" which you have all
read so much about. But it is said that the "Kid" killed every man
connected with the murder of his friend before the war ended.

Billy was caught in a great many close places during the six month's
bloody encounter, but always managed to escape, as though possessed of a
charmed life. There is one of his hair-breadth escapes I wish to relate,
just to show how cool he was in time of danger.

He and about a dozen of his men were housed up at lawyer McSween's in
Lincoln, when thirty-five of the Seven River "warriors" and two
companies of United States Soldiers under command of Col. Dudly of the
Ninth Cavalry, surrounded and set the large two-story building on fire,
determined to capture or kill the young outlaw.

The house was burning on the south side from whence the wind came, and
as the fire advanced the little crowd would move further north, into an
adjoining room. There was a fine piano in the parlor, the property of
Mrs. McSween, who was absent, and on this the "Kid" played during the
whole time, "just to amuse the crowd outside" he said.

Finally everything was wrapped in flames but the little kitchen which
stood adjoining the main building on the north, but still the coarse
music continued to sail forth out onto the night air.

At last the blaze began to stick its firey tongues into the kitchen.
Then the music ceased, and the little band, headed by the "Kid" made a
bold dash for liberty, amidst the thick shower of hot lead. The balance
can be described best by quoting a negro soldier's words, he being
nearest the kitchen door when the dash was made: "I jes' tell you white
folkses dis nigger was for getting away from dah, kase dat Billy-goat
was shooten wid a gun and two six-pistols all bofe at de same time."

The "Kid" and Tom O'Phalliard were the only ones who came out of this
scrape unhurt. Mr. McSween, owner of the burned building was among the
killed. He had nine bullets in his body.

Late that fall when the war had ended, "Kid" and the remainder of his
little gang stole a bunch of horses from the Seven River warriors, whom
they had just got through fighting with and drove them across the Plains
to the Texas Panhandle, at Tascosa on the Canadian, where they were soon
disposed of at good figures.

After lying around the little town of Tascosa for nearly a month,
squandering their surplus wealth on poor whisky and mexican woman, they,
with the exception of Fred Wayt and Henry Brown who struck east for the
Chickisaw nation where the former's mother and two half-breed sisters
lived, pulled back to Lincoln County, New Mexico, to continue their
lawlessness.

From that time on, the "Kid" made a specialty of stealing cattle and
horses, although he would kill a man now and then, for what he supposed
to be a just cause. Let it be said right here that the "Kid" was not the
cruel hearted wretch that he was pictured out to be in the scores of
yellow-back novels, written about him. He was an outlaw and maybe a very
wicked youth, but then he had some good qualities which, now that he is
no more, he should be credited with. It has been said and written that
he would just as soon shoot an innocent child as a mule-eared rabbit.
Now this is all wrong, for he was noted as being kind to the weak and
helpless; there is one case in particular which I can prove:

A man, now a highly respected citizen of White Oaks, was lying at the
point of death in Ft. Sumner, without friends or money, and a stranger,
when the "Kid," who had just come into town from one of his raids, went
to his rescue, on hearing of his helpless condition; the sick man had
been placed in an old out-house on a pile of sheep skins. The "Kid"
hired a team and hauled him to Las Vegas, a distance of over a hundred
miles, himself, where he could receive care and medical aid. He also
paid the doctor and board bills for a month, besides putting a few
dollars in money in the sick man's hand as he bid him good bye.

This circumstance was told to me by the sick man himself, who at the
time was hale and hearty, on hearing of the "Kid's" death. While
relating it the tears chased one another down his manly cheeks, to the
end, at which time he pulled out a large red handkerchief and wiped them
away.

After the "Kid's" capture at Stinking Springs, he was lodged in jail at
Santa Fe, and the following spring taken to Mesilla, county seat of
Dona Ana county, and tried before Judge Bristol for the murder of
Sheriff Brady, during the Lincoln county war.

He was sentenced to be taken to Lincoln, and hung on the 13th day of
May. On the 21st day of April he was turned over to Pat. Garrett, who,
being sheriff, was to see that the law was carried out.

There being no jail in Lincoln, Garrett used his office, which was
up-stairs in the two-story court house, to guard the prisoner in. Robert
Ollinger and J. W. Bell, two men who should have been hung before
William Bonney was born--judging from reliable reports, were secured to
do the guarding.

The morning of April, 28th, Garrett was making preparations to go to
White Oaks, when he told the guards to be very watchful as the prisoner,
not having but a few more days to live, might make a desperate effort to
escape.

Ollinger who hated the "Kid," they having fought against one another in
the Lincoln County war, spoke up and said: "Don't worry Pat, we'll watch
him like a goat." So saying he unlocked the armory, a small closet in
the wall, and getting out his double-barrel shot gun, put eighteen
buck-shot in each barrel. Then setting it back, remarked, at the same
time glancing over in the opposite corner at the "Kid" who was sitting
on a stool, shackled and hand-cuffed: "I bet the man that gets them will
feel it!" The "Kid" gave one of his hopeful smiles and said: "You might
be the one to get them yourself."

After Garrett left, the two guards had five more prisoners to look
after. But they were allowed to wear their pistols, for fear of being
mobbed by a crowd of Tulerosa mexicans who had chased them into Lincoln.
They had given themselves up to Garrett more for protection than
anything else. They had killed four Tulerosa mexicans, in a hand to hand
fight, the day before, hence the mob being after them. One of those
prisoners was a young Texan by the name of Chas. Wall, who had received
two almost fatal bullet wounds in the fracas of the day before. It was
from this young man, Mr. Wall, whom I became personally acquainted with
afterwards, that I received my information from, in regard to the
"Kid's" escape, etc.

About five o'clock, that evening, Ollinger took the armed prisoners
across the street, to the hotel, to supper, leaving Bell to guard the
"Kid."

According to what the "Kid" told after his escape, Bell became
interested in a newspaper, and while thus engaged, he slipped one of his
hand-cuffs, which he could have done long before if the right chance had
been presented, and made a leap towards his guard, using the hand-cuff
as a weapon.

Bell almost fainted on looking up from his paper. He broke for the door
after receiving a stunning lick over the head with the hand-cuff. But
the "Kid" was right at his heels; and when he got to the door and
started down stairs the "Kid" reached forward and jerked the frightened
man's pistol which still hung at his side, he having never made an
effort to pull it. Bell fell dead out in the back yard, near the foot of
the stairs, with a bullet hole through his body.

"Kid" then hobbled, or jumped, his legs being still shackled, to the
armory and kicking the door open secured Ollinger's shot-gun, which
contained the eighteen buck-shot in each barrel. Then springing to an
open window, in an adjoining room, under which the other guard would
have to come to get up stairs, he waited patiently for his "meat," as
he termed it.

He hadn't waited long though when Ollinger, who had started on hearing
the shooting, came trotting under the window. "Kid" called in a pleasant
voice: "Hello, Bob!" Robert looked up, but just in time to receive
eighteen buck-shot in his breast. The "Kid" then walked out onto the
balcony, fronting on Main street, and emptied the other barrel into the
dead body of Ollinger. Then breaking the gun in two over the balcony
railing he threw the pieces at the corpse, saying: "Take that you s----
of a b----h! You will never follow me with that gun again!"

This proceeding was witnessed by nearly a hundred citizens, nearly all
of whom sympathized with the "Kid," although they didn't approve of his
law-breaking. There was a few of his bitter enemies in town, though, but
they soon hunted their holes, each one trying to pull the hole in after
him, so as to be hid from the outside world.

After being supplied from the armory with a good winchester, two colts
"45" pistols and four belts of cartridges, he ordered a file thrown up
to him, which was done without ceremony; he also ordered the deputy
County Clerk's pony and saddle brought out into the street, which was
also done in double quick time.

The shackles being filed in two he danced around on the balcony quite a
while, as though he was the happiest mortal on earth.

As he went to mount, the firey pony, which was being held out in the
street, and which had once belonged to him, broke loose and ran back to
the stable. But he was soon brought back, and this time held until the
"Kid" was securely seated in the saddle.

After bidding everybody in sight adieu he rode slowly towards the
setting sun, the winchester still gripped in his right hand. But when he
arrived at the end of Main street he pulled off his hat, and waving it
over his head, yelled at the top of his voice: "Three cheers for Billy
the Kid!" Then putting spurs to the pony he dashed out of sight.

After traveling about four miles west he turned north-east, across the
Capitan mountains, towards Ft. Sumner.

About the first of July, Garrett, who hadn't hunted much for the "Kid"
since his escape, received a letter from a Mr. Brazil, who lived near
Ft. Sumner, informing him of the "Kid's" presence in that vicinity.

Garrett after answering the letter, asking Mr. Brazil to meet him at a
certain spot on a certain night, secured the services of John W. Poe,
one of the whitest and bravest men in the Territory, and taking his
Deputy, "Kip" McKinnie along, struck out for "Sumner" to capture the Kid
if possible.

The little party of three arrived at the mouth of Tayban Arroyo, on the
Reo Pecos, where Garrett had written Brazil to meet him, about dark on
the night of July 13th. They waited there all night and Mr. Brazil
failed to show up.

Mr. Poe being a stranger in that country, and not known in the Post,
Garrett sent him to the town, a distance of five miles, to try and
learn, by keeping his ears open and mouth shut, of the "Kid's"
whereabouts, while he and "Kip" would meet him at "Sunny-side" a ranch
seven miles above "Sumner."

About sundown Poe met his two companions, at Sunny-side, but was no
wiser than when he had left them. Garrett then concluded that they would
all ride into the town and if Peet Maxwell was at home he could maybe
get some information from him.

Arriving in an old orchard back of the Maxwell mansion about ten o'clock
that night, they tied their horses and crawled around to the front of
the building.

There was a long porch on the south side of the house and about midway
was Peet's room, the door of which opened onto the porch. Garrett knew
where the room was, and there they headed for.

On arriving in the front yard opposite the door of Peet's room, which
was wide open, the night being very hot, Garrett told his companions to
lie flat down in the grass while he slipped into the room.

He found Peet asleep, but awakened him. He then laid down by the side of
Peet, and they began talking.

Back of the Maxwell house was an adobe cabin in which lived an old
mexican Peon. The mexican had gone to bed, and by a greasy looking table
sat the "Kid," who had just come in from the hills. He had pulled off
his boots to rest his tired feet, and was glancing over a newspaper.

Throwing down the paper he told the Peon to get up and cook him some
supper, as he was very hungry. Being told that there was no meat in the
house he picked up a butcher-knife which was lying on the table, and
said: "I will go and get Peet to rustle me a piece." He started without
either hat or boots.

While walking along on the porch, butcher-knife in hand, he discovered
the two men out in the grass, and, drawing his pistol, asked in mexican:
Quien es? Quien es? (Who's there? Who's there?) Not getting an answer,
the boys thinking he was one of the Peons, he backed into the door of
Peet's room, and then turning towards the bed, which was to the left of
the door, he asked: "Peet, who is that out there?" Not receiving an
answer again, and being suspicious of some one being in bed with Peet,
he began backing towards the opposite side of the room, at the same time
asking: "Who in the h--l is in here? Who in the h--l is in here?"

Peet whispered to Garrett: "That's him Pat." And by that time the "Kid"
had backed until the light shone full upon him, through one of the south
windows, giving Garrett a good chance to make a center shot.

Bang! Bang! went Garrett's pistol. The first bullet took effect in the
"Kid's" heart, while the next one struck the ceiling.

The remains of what was once a fond mother's darling were buried next
day in the old dilapidated Military Cemetery, without a murmer, except
from one, a pretty young half-breed mexican damsel, whose tears, no
doubt, has dampened the lonely grave more than once.

Thus ended the life of William H. Bonney, one of the coolest-headed, and
most daring young outlaws that ever lived. He had dwelt upon this earth
just 21 years, seven months and 21 days.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

WRESTLING WITH A DOSE OF SMALL POX ON THE LLANO ESTICADO.


After leaving Toyah I followed the railroad east cross the Reo Pecos,
out onto the Llano Esticado and through the sixty mile stretch of Sand
Hills.

At Sand Hill Station, about midway through the sand hills, I left the
railroad and branched off in a north-easterly direction in search of
buffalo-hunter's camps. Knowing buffalo were getting scarce, and having
heard of a great many hunters being in the vicinity of Ceader Lake, I
thought it a good idea to go out there and see what kind of game they
were killing. Being nearly south of the Canadian River country, I
thought maybe they were killing cattle which had drifted down in there
during the winters. But I was mistaken. I found their camps black with
genuine buffalo hides. There being no ranches in that wild scope of
country the buffalo, what few there were left, had nearly all
congregated in there.

I played a single-handed game of freeze-out the first two nights after
leaving the railroad, for there came a terrible snow storm, which
covered up the buffalo-chips, there being no wood in that whole country,
so that I couldn't make a fire to warm by.

After striking the first buffalo-camp, then I was all right, for I could
get directions how to find the next one, etc.

I finally, by circling around to the east, and then south, struck the
railroad again, and landed in the town of Big Springs; where I was
mistaken for a horse-thief, whom I answered the description of, and told
to "skip" by one of my friends, a stranger who recognized me as the
turkey shooter from Toyah. I didn't skip; and the thing was finally
straightened up to their entire satisfaction.

I was out of money by this time, but found a draft in the express office
awaiting me. Not having any particular use for the draft I swapped it
off for a hundred dollars in money, to the express manager.

After looking through a few herds around the Springs I pulled north-east
for the head of Colorado River, to take a look over the Lum Slaughter
range, which extended from the head of Colorado River down to Colorado
City on the railroad, a distance of about sixty miles. I went to all the
sign camps, and also the head-quarter ranch, but didn't let my business,
residence or name be known, which caused the boys to believe I was "on
the dodge."

I rode into the lively little town of Colorado City one afternoon about
four o'clock, and imagine my surprise at meeting Miss Bulah Newell on
her way home from school. She and Mrs. Newell had left Toyah shortly
after I did. They had left Mr. Newell at home to run the Hotel. And Mrs.
Newell had accompanied Bulah to Colorado City, the nearest place where
there was a school, so as to keep "the wild rattled-brain girl," as she
called her, under her wing. They had rented a little cottage and were
keeping house.

I ran out of money shortly after striking Colorado City, my expenses
being high, having to pay three dollars a day to keep my two horses at a
feed stable, and one dollar and a half per day for my own board,
lodging, etc., but found a good friend, Mr. Snyder, a merchant, who let
me have all I wanted on my good looks until I could write to the ranch
for some.

While waiting for an answer to my letter I would put in my spare time
taking little spins out into the country, looking through herds of
cattle, etc. The longest trip I made was three days, down on the Concho
River, and that was just two days and a half longer than I cared to be
away from Miss Bulah.

The mail finally brought two hundred dollars worth of "L. X." drafts,
wrapped up in a letter from Mr. Erskine Clement, reminding me of the
fact that his company wasn't a First National Bank. This of course was a
hint for me to be more economical.

Having to be in Mesilla, New Mexico, a distance of five hundred and
fifty miles, by the last of March, and wanting to look over some small
cattle ranges on the route, I struck out. I hated to leave Colorado City
on account of Bulah, but was anxious to leave on account of the
small-pox beginning to spread there.

A forty-mile ride brought me to Big Springs, where I lay two days with a
burning fever. The morning of the third day I pulled out, across the
Staked Plains for the Reo Pecos, still feeling sick.

That night I stopped at one of the section houses, which were located
every ten miles along the railroad. And the next morning after riding
about five miles I became so sick that I had to dismount and lie down
in the grass. After groaning and tumbling around about two hours I fell
asleep.

About sundown an east bound freight train came along, which scared my
ponies and awakened me. I felt terribly; my lips were parched, my bones
ached and my tongue felt as though it was swollen out of shape. I
started to lie down again, after the noise from the passing train had
died out, but there being an ugly looking black cloud in the north,
which indicated a norther, I concluded to brace up and ride to the next
section house, a distance of about five miles.

Arriving there, just as a cold norther was springing up, and riding up
to the fence I called: "Hello!" in a feeble voice. A gentleman came out,
and on informing him that I was sick, he told me to go in the house,
that he would unsaddle and take care of my horses.

I walked into a large room where a nice blazing fire greeted my eyes.
There was a lady sitting by the fire sewing. On looking up at me, as I
stepped into the door, she gave a scream, which brought her husband in
on the double quick. "Small-pox, small-pox," was all she could say. The
gentleman looked at me and asked: "Are you from Colorado City?" "Yes,"
was my answer. "Well, you have got it, and I am sorry we can't keep you
here to-night. I hate to turn a sick man out such a night as this, but I
have got a wife and three little children here whose lives are at
stake."

I had never thought of small-pox since leaving Colorado City, until the
good lady put me in mind of it.

Oh, how my heart did ache at the thoughts of that dreadful disease, and
having to go out into the cold night air. It was pitch dark and
beginning to sleet when I mounted and struck out, west, aiming to go on
to the next section house, ten miles, and try my luck there.

About half an hour after the light over my shoulder had disappeared I
began to grow weaker, so much so that I could hardly sit on my saddle.
So finally, dismounting, I unsaddled and staking the two hungry ponies
out to a telegraph pole, rolled myself up in my blankets, my saddle for
a pillow, and went to sleep.

I awakened just as day was breaking. The ground was covered with snow,
and I was almost frozen. I felt as though I had been sent for and
couldn't go. My mouth, I could tell by feeling it, was covered with
sores, in fact it was one solid scab, and so were my shoulders and back.
Strange to say there wasn't a sore on any other part of my body. Those
sores on my mouth was what attracted the lady's attention the evening
before, although they had just began to show themselves then.

With great difficulty I saddled up and continued on towards the section
house. This time I made up my mind not to let the folks know where I was
from, and if they had cheek enough to ask I intended to say Ft. Concho.
To avoid the sores on my mouth being seen I tied a silk handkerchief
around it. And should they ask any questions about that, I intended
telling them I had some fever blisters on my mouth, etc.

I found only one man, the cook, at the Section house this time, the
section hands having gone to work. I was treated like a white head by
the cook, who no doubt took me for a desperado or horse-thief, by my
looks. He thought no doubt the handkerchief was tied over my face to
keep from being recognized.

I informed him that I was feeling bad and would like to lie down a few
moments, etc. He led the way up stairs where the section hands slept
and told me to occupy any of the dirty looking beds there. I laid down
and told him to bring me up a cup of coffee. He brought up a good
breakfast and after he left I undone the handkerchief and tried to eat,
but couldn't, on account of my tongue being so badly swollen.

I found a looking glass in the room and took a squint at myself, and
must say that I was indeed a frightful looking aspect, my face from nose
to chin being a solid scab and terribly swollen. No wonder I frightened
the lady so badly, I thought.

After drinking the hot cup of coffee I went down stairs, gave the cook a
silver dollar for his kindness and pulled out. I was very anxious to get
to a doctor, and Toyah was the nearest place to find one unless I turned
back to Colorado City, which I hated to do on account of having to
attend court in Mesilla, soon.

I arrived in Toyah about noon of the sixth day out from Big Springs. I
headed straight for the Alverado House and who do you suppose was
standing in the door when I rode up? Miss Bulah. The small pox had
scared her and her mother away from Colorado City. The first thing she
said was: "Hello, what's the matter with your face?" "Nothing but fever
blisters." was my answer.

I didn't dismount, for fear of giving the pretty little miss the small
pox, but rode a few blocks to Doctor Roberson's office, telling her that
I was going after some fever medicine and would be back in a few
minutes, etc.

The Doctor informed me that the danger was all over with, and that, if I
hadn't been made of good stuff, I would have surely died, being exposed
to bad weather, etc. He gave me some salve to dry up the sores, that
being all there was to do at that stage of the disease, he said, and
advised me to leave town, for said he: "If the citizens discover that
you have had the small pox, they will have you taken to the pest house,
where there are already three occupants, although the danger of it being
catching from you is past." I assured him that I would fix it so they
wouldn't find it out.

On arriving back to the Alverado House, my face still tied up, I hired a
boy to take care of my ponies and then telling Miss Bulah that I wanted
a room to myself, I went to bed.

Bulah would bring my meals into the room and sometimes sit down to wait
until I got through eating, but I would never commence until she left.
I would generally let her stay until she got ready to go, telling her
that I wasn't hungry just then, but would try and eat it after awhile,
etc. She would finally get tired and go, then I would lock the door and
undo the handkerchief from my face. I kept this up a week, before eating
my meals at the table with the rest of the boarders.

I finally struck out for El Paso, two hundred miles over a dry,
waterless plain, and another hundred up the Rio Grande valley, making
three hundred miles in all.

I hove in sight of the Rio Grande River one morning, but never got there
until sundown.

When I arrived within a few miles of the river I noticed a covered wagon
and what I supposed to be a camp, down the valley, about three miles out
of my way. I finally concluded to turn off and go and stop with whoever
they were for the night.

I found it to be a mexican camp, an old man, two boys and a grown girl.
They had come from Larado and were on their way to El Paso. They gave me
a hearty welcome.

Next morning about daylight I got up and went out to change Croppy, he
having been staked and Buckshot hobbled the evening before, in a fresh
place, but lo, and behold! there was nothing there but the stake.

I circled around and found both of the ponies tracks leading towards the
river, a few hundred yards west, I followed, and found they had crossed
over. After standing on the bank a few seconds, dreading to get wet, I
went over too. The water was only about waist deep.

Near the water's edge on the other side I found some mocassin tracks in
the soft sand. I could see through the whole thing then, from
indications, etc: two footmen, who wore mocassins, had stolen my horses
and pulled into Old Mexico for safety. Where the tracks were visible in
the sand, there was no doubt, they had dismounted and taken a farewell
drink, or maybe filled a canteen, before leaving the river.

After following the trail, there being just the tracks of two horses, a
few hundred yards out from the river I turned and went back to camp, to
try and hire the old mexican's horse to follow them on.

The old fellow only had one pony, his team being oxen and I had to talk
like a Dutch uncle to get it, as he argued that I was liable to get
killed and he lose the pony by the operation. I finally though put up
the price of the horse as security and promised the old fellow ten
dollars a day for the use of him, when I returned. This seemed to give
satisfaction, even with the two boys who would have to hoof it after the
oxen every morning, in case the pony never returned.

Just about sundown as I turned a sharp curve, near the top of the long
chain of high mountains which run parallel with the river, I came in
sight of both of my ponies staked to a pinyon tree, grazing.

I immediately rode out of sight, dismounted, tied my tired pony to a
tree and crawled to the top of a knoll, where I could see the
surrounding country for half a mile around. But I couldn't see a living
thing except the two horses, and the one I had just left.

Finally, bang! went a shot, which sounded to be at least half a mile
away, on the opposite side of the mountains.

Thinks I now there's either a ranch over there and the two thieves have
walked to it, to keep from being seen with the horses, or else they have
gone out hunting to kill something for supper. At any rate I took
advantage of their absence and stole my ponies back. Near where they
were tied was a small spring of cool water; the first water I had seen
since leaving the river.

After taking a hasty drink myself, and letting the pony I was on, fill
up, the other two not being dry, I took a straight shoot down grade, for
the "eastern shores of the Rio Grande," a distance of about thirty-five
miles. It was then nearly dark.

I arrived in camp next morning just as the big yellow sun was peeping
over the top of the Sierra Blanco mountains; and the old mexican, who
was awaiting my return, was glad to see me back.

That night I stopped with an old fat fellow by the name of Chas.
Willson, in the little town of Camp Rice, and the next night I put up in
the beautiful town of San Elizario, which is situated in the centre of
the garden spot of the whole Rio Grande valley.

The next morning I crossed the river into Old Mexico and took a three
day's hunt through the mountains in search of a herd which had come from
the north, and had crossed the river at San Elizario about a week
before. I found it, but was unacquainted with any of the brands that the
cattle wore. The herd had been stolen though, I think, from the way the
men acted.

I finally landed in El Paso and found a letter in the Post Office from
John Poe, written at Lincoln, New Mexico, advising me not to go to
Mesilla until the day that Court set, as Cohglin, who was out on bond,
was there and might have my light blown out, I being one of the main
witnesses against him. Also, it had been reported that he had said he
would give five thousand dollars to get me out of the way. He
furthermore advised me in the letter to take the train from El Paso, as
the old fellow might have some mexicans watching along the road for me.




CHAPTER XXIX.

IN LOVE WITH A MEXICAN GIRL.


I found El Paso, to be a red-hot town of about three thousand
inhabitants. There were also about that number of people in Paso Del
Norte, across the river in Old Mexico. I spent several days in each
place.

I finally, after leaving my ponies in good hands, boarded one of the
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe trains for Las Cruces, two and a half
miles from Mesilla, the county seat.

There being better accommodations, in the way of Hotels, in "Cruces,"
nearly every one who was attending court would stop there and ride to
the county seat in one of the "hacks" which made hourly trips between
the two places. Consequently I put up at the Montezuma House, in Las
Cruces.

There were several Lincoln County boys there when I arrived. Poe and
Garrett came down next day. Mr. and Mrs. Nesbeth also came as witnesses
against Cohglin. Mrs. Nesbeth had heard Mr. Cohglin make the contract
with, "Billy the Kid," to buy all the stolen cattle he would bring to
his ranch. But the good lady didn't live long afterwards, for she, her
husband, a stranger, who was going from "Cruces" to Tulerosa with them,
and a little girl whom they had adopted were all murdered by unknown
parties. Cohglin was accused of having the crime committed, but after
fighting the case through the courts, he finally came clear.

A few days after my arrival in Las Cruces I went back to El Paso after
my ponies. I ate dinner there and rode into Las Cruces about sundown. A
pretty quick fifty-five mile ride, considering part of it being over a
rough mountain road. The cause of my hurry was, we couldn't tell what
minute the Cohglin case would be called up for trial.

I had a little love scrape while loafing in Las Cruces. I don't mention
it because my love scrapes were so scarce, but because it was with a
Mexican girl, and under curious circumstances, that is, the
circumstances were curious from the fact that we became personally
acquainted and never spoke to one another, except by signs, and through
letters.

Her name was Magdalena Ochoa, niece to the rich Bankers Ochoa's in El
Paso, Tucson, Arizona, and Chihuahua, Old Mexico, and she was sweet
sixteen. She lived with her grandmother, whose residence was right
straight across the street from the Montezuma Hotel, and who wouldn't
let a young man, unless he was a Peon, come inside of her house. And she
wouldn't let Magdalena go out of her sight, for fear she would let some
of the young "Gringoes" make love to her.

I first saw her one Sunday morning when she and her grandmother were
going to church. I was standing out in front of the Hotel hugging an
awning post, and wishing that I had something more human-like to hug,
when they passed within a few feet of me. The girl looked up, our eyes
met, and such a pair of eyes I had never seen. They sparkled like
diamonds, and were imbedded in as pretty a face as was ever moulded. Her
form was perfection itself; she had only one drawback that I didn't like
and that was her grandmother. I immediately unwound my arms from around
the post and started to church too.

The church house was a very large building, and the altar was in one
end. The couple I was following walked up near the altar and took a seat
on the right hand side--on the dirt floor, there being no such thing as
seats in the building--which was reserved for ladies, while the left
hand side, of the narrow passage way, was for the men. I squatted myself
down opposite the two, and every now and then the pretty little miss
would cast sparks from her coal black eyes over towards me which would
chill my very soul with delight.

When church was over I followed, to find out where she lived. I was
exceedingly happy when I found she was a near neighbor to me, being only
a few steps across the street.

I spent the rest of that day setting out under the awning in front of
the Hotel, straining my eyes in hopes of getting a glimpse of her
beautiful form through the large bay window which opened out from the
nicely furnished parlor onto the street. But not a glimpse did I get. I
retired that night with the vision of a lovely sunburnt angel floating
before my eyes.

The next morning I went to Mesilla and answered to my name when it was
called, by the Judge, and then told Poe that I had some very important
business to attend to in "Cruces" and for him, in case the Cohglin case
was called, to hire a man at my expense and send him after me.

On arriving back to the Hotel I took a seat in an old arm-chair under
the awning. I was all alone, nearly every one being in Mesilla.

Finally Magdalena brought her sewing and sat down among the flowers in
the bay window. It was indeed a lovely picture, and would have been a
case of "love among the roses" if it hadn't been for her old
grandparent, who every now and then appeared in the parlor.

At last I, having a good chance, no one being in sight but her and I,
threw a kiss, to see how I stood in her estimation. She immediately
darted out of sight, but soon re-appeared and peeping around a cluster
of roses, returned the compliment. She then left the room and I never
seen her again till after dinner.

I then started into the Hotel, but was detained by a voice calling,
through the closed blinds of a window near by: "Me ketch you! Me ketch
you!" Come to find out it was the proprietor's wife, Mrs. Duper, an old
mexican lady, who had been watching our maneuvers. She then opened the
blinds and asked me in broken English, what I was trying to do?

"Oh, nothing, much, just trying to catch on, is all;" was my answer.

The old lady then broke out in one of her jovial fits and said: "You
ketch on? Me bet you ten tousand dollars you no ketch him!" She then
went on and told me how closely the old lady "Grandma Ochoa" watched her
young niece. In fact, she gave me the girl's history from the time of
her birth: Her father and mother were both dead and she, being the only
child, was worth over a million dollars, all in her own name. This of
course was good news to me, as it gave my love a solid foundation, and
spread a kind of gold-like lining over the young lady's beauty.

Finally, after court had been in session two weeks the Cohglin case was
called up. His lawyers were Col. Rynerson and Thornton, while the
Territory was represented by Newcomb, District Attorney, and A. J.
Fountain whose services Poe had secured.

Mr. Cohglin began to grow restless, for the "Pen" stared him in the
face. There were eight indictments against him, but the worst one was
where he had butchered the cattle after being notified by me not to.

His only hopes now was to "sugar" the prosecuting Attorney, and that no
doubt was easily done, or at least it would have looked easy to a man up
a tree. You see Cohglin was worth at least a hundred thousand dollars,
and therefore could well afford to do a little sugaring, especially to
keep out of the Penitentiary. At any rate whether the Attorney was
bought off or not, the trial was put off, on account of illness on said
Attorney's part, until the last days of court.

When the case came up again Mr. Prosecuting Attorney was confined to his
room on account of a severe attack of cramp-colic. Judge Bristol was
mad, and so was Poe. They could see through the whole thing now.

That night Cohglin made a proposition that he would plead guilty to
buying stolen cattle knowing they were stolen, if the one case in which
he had killed cattle after being notified not to, would be dismissed, or
thrown entirely out of court.

It was finally decided to do that, as then he could be sued for damages,
so the next day he plead guilty to the above charge, and was fined one
hundred and fifty dollars besides costs.

Fountain, our lawyer then entered suit against him for ten thousand
dollars damage.

I was then relieved. My mileage and witness fees amounted to something
over a hundred dollars, this time. Of course that was appreciated as it
was my own, over and above my wages. It came handy too as I was almost
broke and needed it to take me home. I had spent all of my own money,
besides nearly one hundred and fifty dollars borrowed from Poe.

It was the first day of May, I think, when I mounted Croppy in front of
the Hotel, threw a farewell kiss at Miss Magdalena, who was standing in
the bay-window, and started east, in company with Chas. Wall--the young
man I mentioned as being a prisoner in Lincoln at the time of "Kid's"
escape. I hated to part with the pleasant smiles of my little mexican
sweetheart, but then it had to be done. I still hold a rose and a bundle
of beautifully written letters to remember her by.

We stopped at San Augustine the first night out from "Cruces," and from
there we struck south-east across the white sands for the mouth of Dog
canyon--the noted rendezvous of old Victoria and his band of
blood-thirsty Apache's.

I had heard so much about this beautiful Dog canyon that I concluded to
see it before going home, so that if it proved to be as represented I
could secure it for a cattle ranch.

It was a ticklish job going there by ourselves, as a telegram was
received in Las Cruces, the morning we left, that a band of Apache's had
crossed the Rio Grande at Colorow, killing three men there, and were
headed toward Dog canyon. But I had faith in Croppy and Buckshot, they
being well rested and hog fat, carrying us out of danger should we come
in contact with them.

We arrived at the noted canyon after being away from water nearly two
days. It was a lovely place, at the foot of Gandalupe mountains.

After leaving there we went through the following towns: La Luz,
Tulerosa, South Fork and Ft. Stanton.

At the last named place Charlie Wall left me, and I continued on alone.

I remained in White Oaks a few days, looking over my town property, I
having bought some lots and built cabins thereon, and examining the 'Old
Panhandle Tiger' gold mine, the one Stone, Chambers and I owned. I had
some of the rock assayed and it run twelve dollars in gold to the ton,
besides a few ounces in silver and about two million dollars worth of
hopes.

From White Oaks I went through Anton Chico, San Lorenzo, Liberty and
Tascosa, and arrived at the "L. X." ranch after an absence of nearly
eight months, and about a three thousand mile ride.




CHAPTER XXX.

A SUDDEN LEAP FROM COW BOY TO MERCHANT.


About the first of July, shortly after my return, Hollicott sent me to
Kansas with a herd of eight hundred fat steers. My outfit consisted of a
cook, chuck wagon, five riders, and six horses to the rider.

We arrived in Caldwell, Kansas, near the northern line of the Indian
Territory, about September the first.

After putting the cattle aboard of the cars, and giving them a send-off
towards Chicago, we all proceeded to take in the "Queen City of the
Border," as Caldwell is called. I immediately fell in love with the
town, also with a couple of young ladies, and therefore concluded to
locate. I bought some lots and contracted a house built, with a view of
going after mother.

I then struck out with my outfit to attend the fall round-ups in the
vicinity of Camp Supply, Indian Territory. Returning to Caldwell the
latter part of November, I boarded a train for Southern Texas, after
mother, by way of Saint Louis to visit my sister whom I hadn't seen for
thirteen long years.

I arrived in Saint Louis one evening--just in time to let an old
flop-eared Jew take me in to the extent of a hundred dollars for a lot
of snide jewelry and a Jim-Crow suit of clothes.

Not caring to hunt sister until morning I went to the Planter's House to
put up for the night, and to note the change of twelve years.

After taking a bath and getting into my new rigging, I took a straight
shoot for the office to make inquiries about the old boys. I found a
long-legged youth behind the counter who, on asking how many of the old
hands of twelve years ago were still there, pointed out Jimmy Byron, the
kid I had the fight with, behind the cigar and news stand, across the
hall. He was very busy at the time dishing out cigars, etc. to the
scores of old fat roosters and lean dudes who were hurrying out after
having eaten their supper.

The rush was finally over and then I made myself known. He was terribly
glad, as well as surprised to see me. We had parted as enemies but now
met as friends. He informed me that there wasn't but three, besides
himself, of the old outfit left, and those were the old steward, who was
now proprietor, "Old" Mike, who was still acting as night watchman, and
Cunningham, the fellow who had slapped me and who was still clerk. The
latter gentleman I didn't get to shake hands with as he failed to put in
an appearance during my stay.

The next morning I struck out to hunt sister. I was armed with an old
letter which gave the address, therefore had no trouble in finding her.

She was alone with her three pretty little girls, her husband having
gone up town to his place of business--a drug store--when I found her.

The first thing she asked after kissing me, was, where I got my new
suit?

Of course I had to acknowledge that I bought them from a Jew on Fourth
street.

She then became frantic and wanted to know why in the world I didn't go
to Humphry's and get them?

"Who in the dickens is Humphry?" I asked.

"Why, I thought everybody knew Mr. Humphry," she continued.

She took me up town to this great establishment of Humphry's that
evening and there I learnt how badly I had been bitten by the Jew.

I remained in the city about a week and my brother-in-law spent most of
his time showing me the sights.

Before taking the train for Texas I bought mother a trunk full of
clothes, knowing that she would be in need of them after having "roughed
it" for nearly eight years.

I stopped in Houston one day looking for Aunt Mary, but learnt finally
that she had moved to the country.

I then took in Galveston and spent two days visiting Uncle Nick and Aunt
Julia. From there I went to Indianola on a Morgan Steamship and became
sea sick; Oh, Lord! I concluded I would prefer the hurricane deck of a
Spanish pony to that of a ship, every time.

In the town of Indianola I met a lot of my old Peninsula playmates, who
were there from Matagorda, in their sail boats, with freight.

There being no boats down from Tresspalacious, I left my trunk to be
shipped up the first chance and went to Matagorda with the two Williams'
boys, Johnny and Jimmy. Nearly all the Peninsula folks lived in the
vicinity of Matagorda now since the great storm of 1875, washed
everything they had out into the Gulf, besides drowning about half of
their number. Hence me going to Matagorda to visit them.

There were three Tresspalacious boys in Matagorda, and one of them, Jim
Keller, loaned me his horse and saddle to ride home on.

Mother was happy when I told her to get ready and go to Kansas with me.
There was only one thing she hated to leave behind, and that was her
wood pile. She had spent the past two years lugging wood from along the
creek and piling it up against her old shanty for "old age," she said. I
suppose her idea in piling it against the house, on all sides, was to
keep it from blowing over, should some kind of an animal accidently blow
its breath against it.

After spending about a week, visiting friends and waiting for my trunk
to arrive from Indianola, I struck out with mother for the enterprising
State of Kansas.

I hired a neighbor, Mr. Cornelious, to take us to the Railroad, fifty
miles north. He hauled us in an old go cart--one that had been sent
from Germany in 1712--drawn by two brindle oxen.

We arrived in Caldwell a few days before Christmas and after getting
mother established in her new house, I went to work for the "L. X."
company again.

I had secured a winter's job from Mr. Beals before leaving therefore it
was all ready for me to take charge of on my return. The job was feeding
and taking care of about two hundred head of horses, at the company's
ranch on the Territory line, near Caldwell.

Having lots of fat ponies to ride, I used to take a dash up town nearly
every night to see how mother was getting along and to see my
sweethearts. Thus the winter passed off pleasantly.

About the first of March I received orders from Mr. Beals, who was then
at his home in Boston, Mass. to get everything in shape to start for the
Panhandle at a moment's notice.

That very night, after those orders were received, I fell head over
heels in love with a pretty little fifteen-year old, black-eyed miss,
whom I accidently met. It was a genuine case of love at first sight. I
wanted her, and wanted her badly, therefore I went to work with a brave
heart and my face lined with brass. It required lots of brass too, as I
had to do considerable figuring with the old gent, she being his only
daughter.

Just three days after meeting we were engaged and at the end of the next
three days we were made one. And three days later I was on my way to the
Panhandle with an outfit of twenty-five men, one hundred horses and six
wagons.

An eighteen day's drive, southwest, brought us to the "L. X." ranch.
After laying there about a week, resting up, Hollicott sent me and my
outfit south to attend the round ups in the Red River country.

We arrived back at the ranch about July the first, with three thousand
head of "L. X." cattle which had drifted south during the past winter.

As I was anxious to get back to Kansas to see my wife and mother,
Hollicott immediately gathered eight hundred fat shipping steers and
started me.

I arrived in Caldwell September the first, and after shipping the herd,
Mr. Beals ordered me to take the outfit back to the Panhandle and get
another drove. This of course didn't suit, as I had only been at home a
few days. But then what could I do? I hated to give up a good job, with
no prospects of making a living by remaining in town.

I finally concluded to obey orders, so started the men and horses up the
Territory line, while I and Sprague went to town with the wagon to load
it with chuck. Mr. Beals had taken the train the day before to be absent
quite a while. After getting the wagon loaded and ready to start, I
suddenly swore off cow-punching and turned everything over to Mr.
Sprague, who bossed the outfit back to the Panhandle.

The next day I rented a vacant room on Main street and, rolling up my
sleeves and putting on a pair of suspenders, the first I had ever worn,
started out as a merchant--on a six-bit scale. Thus one cow-puncher
takes a sensible tumble and drops out of the ranks.

Now, dear reader in bidding you adieu, will say: should you not be
pleased with the substance of this _book_, I've got nothing to say in
defence, as I gave you the best I had in my little shop, but before you
criticise it from a literary standpoint, bear in mind that the writer
had fits until he was ten years of age, and hasn't fully recovered from
the effects.

FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber Notes

  Minor obvious spelling and punctuation errors
  have been corrected.

  Words with various spellings interchangeably used in
  the book have been retained as written.

  Whisky-peet,  Whisky peet, Whiskey-peet, and Whisky-peat
  sunup; sun-up
  breastworks; breast-works
  may be; may-be
  daylight; day-light
  hairbreadth; hair-breadth
  headquarter; head-quarter
  storekeeper; store-keeper
  sundown; sun-down
  southeast; south-east
  upstairs; up-stairs
  daylight; day-light

  page 292: made up my mind not to let the folk's know where ...
  author perhaps intended folks? left as written.

  page 271, 307 the spelling Gandalupe mountains is used in this
  book twice and is found in few other sources at the time. Although
  spelled Guadalupe mountains in most other sources, it is left as
  written: Gandalupe mountains.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Texas Cow Boy, by Chas. A. Siringo

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TEXAS COW BOY ***

***** This file should be named 38309.txt or 38309.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/0/38309/

Produced by Dianna Adair, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
