The Project Gutenberg EBook of Princess Badoura, by Laurence Housman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Princess Badoura
       A tale from the Arabian Nights

Author: Laurence Housman

Illustrator: Edmund Dulac

Release Date: February 14, 2016 [EBook #51219]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCESS BADOURA ***




Produced by Madeleine Fournier. Images from the Collection
of The Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County.






[Illustration: Princess Badoura]



PRINCESS BADOURA

A tale from the Arabian Nights

Retold by Laurence Housman

illustrated by

Edmund Dulac


Hodder and Stoughton



List of Illustrations


Princess Badoura

Dahnash and Meymooneh

  'As she rose up through clouds there passed one she knew by his tail
  to be Dahnash.'

The King of China and Badoura

  'The King came in haste, and found that which till now he had only
  pretended, concerning his daughter, apparently come true.'

Camaralzaman as an Astrologer

  'At last the King heard him, and said to the Vizier, "Go down and
  bring the Astrologer in."'

Camaralzaman Cures Badoura

  'She ran forth, and threw herself into the arms of Camaralzaman.'

Camaralzaman Finds the Talisman

  'The Prince saw the girdle, and knotted within its folds, a large
  stone.'

Prince Camaralzaman and the Birds

  'In the leaves overhead he saw one furiously attacking another with
  beak and claw.'

Badoura Watching the Ship

  'It so happened as the ship came into the harbour, Badoura was
  looking out towards the sea.'

Capture of Camaralzaman

  'The captain of the ship goes to capture Camaralzaman at the command
  of Badoura.'

The Final Marriage Procession




A Tale from The Arabian Nights Retold by Laurence Housman


The Sultan Shahriar stands out to fame as the greatest monogamist in
all history. Having been deceived by his first wife, he caused her to
be put to death, and then proceeded to avenge himself upon a thousand
others. Faithful to his monogamic instincts, he married a fresh wife
every day, and on the morning of the next became a widower. Having
thus achieved faith to a thousand dead maidens--all equally beloved
in turn--he may, in his heart of hearts, have found that change, so
doggedly insisted on, did but mean boredom, and so may readily have
welcomed any excuse to relax a performance to which he had bound
himself by many religious oaths.

But, if he had a heart, the old Eastern chronicler has neglected
to tell us what was in it; and at the point where his sacrificial
bridals have become monotonous, the interest of the story shifts from
bridegroom to bride, and Scheherazade, daughter of the Grand Vizier,
witty, courageous, resourceful, and most prolix of all delightful
tale-tellers, adventurously enters the royal menage, and becomes his
only surviving wife.

For Scheherazade, intent on saving the lives of others, brings her
bridesmaid with her, a younger sister named Dinarzade; and when the
morning light comes to tell her that death is near, Dinarzade--prompted
thereto beforehand--stirs in her attendant place at the foot of the
couch, and asks for the sake of old times that one last tale may be
told.

Shahriar, at the bride's humble request, grants permission, and from
that moment is in the toils of the plot which has made his name so
secondary in importance to hers. Scheherazade, 'to do a great right,
does a little wrong': by her entrancing powers of narrative, always
interrupted when the interest of each story is at its height, she
breeds in her tyrant lord infirmity of will, and destroys the only
principle of conduct wherewith he set out to teach woman her place. For
the thousand and one nights which have given their name to the world's
most famous collection of stories, he lives blissfully forsworn,
postponing the execution of his wife to another day; and at the end,
repenting him of his vows, does what we still make our kings do in
England when justice has gone astray, and bestows his 'free pardon'
upon innocence.

The story which is here retold, with many of its life-saving
prolixities omitted, has the distinction of being, according to some
versions, the last of all: it witnesses the accomplishment of the task
which Scheherazade set out to perform. [Pg 4]With the story of Badoura,
the woman of beauty and brain, who, personating her husband, ruled a
Kingdom, and without jealousy provided him at the end of his wanderings
with a second wife--in this story Scheherazade, her great act of
statesmanship concluded, adumbrates what woman set free to use her own
resources can do. And in this reflection of her own great adventurous
self the series concludes. Through a thousand dim dawns, with the
issue still in doubt, she has led the forlorn hope for all the other
women whose lives she would save; and when her tyrant relents, and in
his promise to spare her life spares theirs as well, she kneels and
gratefully kisses his feet.



The History of Badoura, Princess of China, and of Camaralzaman, The
Island Prince


The story of Aboulhassan, the Prince of Persia, had come to an end and
the light of morning was full. Then said Dinarzade, 'Another story,
O sister, another story!' Scheherazade made answer, 'If my Lord will
suffer me to live for another day, there is yet one more tale that I
could tell. The history of Prince Camaralzaman and of his bride Badoura
is far more entrancing than that which I have just given; but it is too
long to be told now.'

Then she was silent; and Shahriar could not bring himself to order her
death till he had heard that story also. So once more he let his oath
stay unfulfilled and deferred sentence; and the next night, wakened
in the small hours towards dawn, Scheherazade, opening a mouth of
loveliness and filling it with wise and sweet words, took up the thread
of her tale and began:

O King, live for ever! About twenty days' sail from the coast of
Persia there lies in the open sea an island which is called Khaledan,
a country wealthy and prosperous and containing many large and
well-inhabited towns. Its ruler in ancient times was a king named
Shahzaman. As a reward for his many virtues, he had gathered about him
a large and well-proportioned household, four wives, the daughters of
kings, and sixty concubines; but, in spite of so generous a provision
for that which only Heaven can bestow, he had no son; and as time went
on, and he grew old, his bones wasted, and his heart became filled with
affliction; and he said to his Vizier, 'Now in a little while I shall
die; then will my name perish, and my Kingdom pass to others, for I
have not a son to come after me. Tell me, is there anything I can do to
avert so great a calamity?'

His Vizier answered, 'When human means fail, it is then that we must
rely on Heaven, for often these evils are sent to remind us of our
dependence on Him who alone holds power. Fast, therefore, and pray, and
perform ablutions, and when that is done make a great banquet, and call
to it the poor and needy; it may be that among them will be found one
pure and righteous soul whose blessing will thus descend on thee, for
the fulfilment of thy desire.'

The King did as his Vizier advised: he made a great feast, and called
to it all whose poverty might give virtue to their petition: and
bidding them pray that he might have a son, caused meat to be set
before them; so they did eat and were filled.

This holy act had the desired effect; one of the King's four Queens
immediately conceived, and in course of time presented him with a son
as fair as a full moon on a cloudless night. When the midwives and
nurses carried him to his father, the King, seeing his beauty and
transported with joy at the event, named him Camaralzaman, that is to
say Moon of the Age; and he sent out orders, on pain of death to any
who disobeyed, that for seven days the drums were to beat and every
house in the city to be decorated in sign of thanksgiving. Never were
such rejoicings heard.

The Prince was reared and educated with all care and magnificence until
he attained the age of fifteen. For the polish of his manners and the
enlightenment of his brain the wisest and most accomplished men in the
Kingdom were chosen; and since from the first he displayed a modest and
docile disposition, combined with a fine understanding, he became, as
he approached the years of manhood, the most virtuous and eligible heir
to a throne that monarch or people could find it in their hearts to
desire.

He was of surpassing comeliness and grace, perfect in form and stature;
and his father loved him so tenderly that he could scarcely bear to be
away from him either by night or day. This devotion to his son was,
indeed, so excessive, that the King himself was perturbed by it, for
always accompanying it was a terror lest the Prince might die.

One day he said to his Grand Vizier, 'How came it that my happiness in
the possession of such a son gives me anxiety rather than rest? When I
was childless I was miserable, and now that the desire of my heart has
been satisfied, I am full of dread lest he also should die childless
and my hope of posterity fail? Calamities and accidents come when we
least expect them, and so it seems to me now that the Prince being
vigorous and strong is in greater danger of death than I who am near
the grave. For him a thousand perils are waiting, while I have nothing
to fear but old age. If, therefore, I may not see my son married in my
own lifetime I shall die in a state more miserable than that which I
endured before he was born.'

His Vizier said, 'The Prince is still full young, but nothing forbids
that he should marry if, by the will of Allah, we can find one worthy
of him.'

'As for that,' said the King, 'Heaven cannot have willed to send into
the world a form of beauty and of virtue so pre-eminent without also
providing a fitting match for it. Doubt not, if the Prince himself is
willing, that some maiden not too far beneath him will be found capable
of sustaining the honour.'

So Shahzaman sent for his son, and Camaralzaman came and stood before
him, and when he saw the King seated in state upon his throne, though
not having his lords round him, the Prince bade reverence take the
place of love, and with his head bowed down toward the ground waited in
submission for the royal word to be spoken.

Thus he stood before his father humbly as a stranger; for never before
had the King so received him, and he wondered why he had been summoned,
and in his heart there was a fear.

The King perceiving his reserve said to him, 'My son, can you now
guess for what reason I have sent for you?' But the Prince answered,
'My lord, I would not so presume; for it is not in the power of one so
young as I am to fathom the thoughts of the hearts of Kings. Only when
I hear the true reason from your Majesty's lips will my brain become
enlightened.'

So he spoke, with all the decorum, and deference, and virtue, and
prudent modesty which had been instilled in him by the preceptors of
his youth; and Shahzaman, his father, loved him for it, and said in his
heart, 'Never was King blessed with such a son as I.'

Then he said to the Prince, 'What thou lackest in years of man's estate
thou hast already gained in wisdom and understanding; therefore as
a man I speak to thee. Know, then, it is my wish that thou shouldst
marry, so that before my days are ended I may rejoice in the assurance
of my posterity.'

When Camaralzaman heard these words he no longer hung his head, but
stood up straight; and as he made answer to the King his face flushed
and his eyes grew bright; and said he, 'O my father, is it into bondage
you would deliver me ere I become a man? Lo, here am I, the son of
Kings, and all my life till now have I been free, and my soul has
been free within me, because I have not gone in the way of women nor
inclined my heart toward them; but if I marry, then by their cunning
and guile will my soul and my freedom be taken from me. Far rather
would I drink the cup of death.'

When King Shahzaman heard that, the light of day darkened before him,
for never until now had his son gone against his wish or disobeyed his
word. But, because he loved the youth very tenderly, he forgave him
and thought not at this time to punish him; for he said to himself,
'At present he is full young, and excess of virtue hath caused his
manhood to slumber.' So he forbore, and waited till another year should
have passed, and withdrew not from his son the light and favour of his
countenance.

So Camaralzaman continued in undisturbed life to receive the
instructions of his preceptors, and every day he increased in beauty
and comeliness of form, in modesty of mind, and in grace of manner and
in elegance of deportment. Added to which, he became accomplished in
verse, and eloquence, and rhetoric and the divine sciences, so that the
flower of his form and the honey of his understanding made together a
thing of inconceivable loveliness and attraction. Even as a magical
willow-branch bearing peach-blossom and fruit at one season, so was he.

Now when another year was completed, his father having once more
consulted with the Grand Vizier, sent for him again, and said, 'This
time, O my son, listen to my word, and obey; for now have thy years
touched manhood, and unless thou beget children thy virtue and wisdom
are wasted. Therefore if thou wilt marry her whom I shall now choose
for thee, I will also make thee ruler over all my dominions; so with
mine eyes shall I see my kingdom and my posterity established, and
rejoice in thee before I die.'

But the Prince had listened so well to the preceptors set over him to
guard his virtue, and had pondered so deeply the books which wise men
had written in their old age, when delight had fled from them and when
all that they had done in the past seemed only to be vanity, that his
mind, even though his heart softened to his father's request, remained
as aforetime. Therefore, abasing himself in fear and reverence at the
King's feet, he said, 'O my father, not so can I find happiness, or
strength, or wisdom wherewith to rule others, seeing that if I marry
I cease to be ruler of myself. In all things outward it is Allah's
will that I should obey you; but in this which comes from within and
concerns myself alone, I can obey the voice of no man, however wise he
may be. Yet, by all the seers and poets and soothsayers is the same
thing told, that woman is a calamity, and that from her spring all the
weaknesses and afflictions of men.' And so saying with sweetness and
modulation of tone, and grace of gesture, Camaralzaman began to recite
to his father all the words of the poets; and there was not a poet who
had written poetry in his old age whose verses did not bear out the
contention.

So when the King had heard the verses of the poets and the words of
the ancients arrayed against him, he returned no answer; for he said
to himself: 'I doubt not but that before another year shall have run
that voice within will have spoken differently to my son than it speaks
now, and the words of the sages will have far less weight with him then
than the glance of some woman's eye.' Once more, therefore, letting
his tenderness extinguish his resentment, he forgave the Prince's
disobedience and received him back into his favour.

But to his Grand Vizier Shahzaman said, 'Now twice, O Vizier, have I
come to thee for advice, and what profit has it been? When I consulted
thee first as to marrying my son thy word was for it; yet no sooner did
I mention it to him than his mind rebelled. This time also, it was on
thy advice that I sought to bribe him by the offer of power; but when I
offered him the Crown, so little did he care that he seemed almost not
to have heard me. What better advice, then, wilt thou give me now so
that my patience may be rewarded and my heart obtain its desire?'

[Illustration: Dahnash and Meymooneh.

'As she rose up through clouds there passed one she knew by his tail to
be Dahnash.' (p. 27)]

The Vizier answered, 'O King, thy son hath presumed on thy forbearance,
knowing well thy tenderness, and when thou hast spoken with him it hath
been privately and as a father. But when a year hence the time comes to
speak with him again on this matter, then speak not to him privately
any more, but before all the people, with the emirs and the viziers
and the troops standing by. Then he will no longer dare to oppose
thee, since to do so before all those witnesses would be an offence
treasonable and worthy of death.'

So the King accepted the advice of his Vizier, and when another
year had gone by he summoned the Prince to his presence on a day of
festival, when all about him were the dignitaries and chamberlains of
his court, the viziers of the provinces, and the emirs of neighbouring
states who paid tribute to Shahzaman as their Sultan. Thus he sat in
all his power and splendour, and Camaralzaman came in and drew near,
and stood before him, being then in his eighteenth year, with the early
bloom of manhood beginning to show upon his cheek. Allah, who loves to
give beauty to virtue, had clothed him in comeliness and crowned his
features with joy; his eyes were like pools of deep water and their
glances flashed like a fountain in the sun; and from head to foot
whether he moved or stood he was perfect in dignity and grace.

As he approached, thrice he bent and kissed the ground in sign of
obedience and reverence, and thereafter stood upright, with hands
folded behind his back, waiting to hear the King's pleasure.

Shahzaman spoke. 'Once more, O my son, I have sent for thee to declare
my will. Twice ere this have I been tender and patient, not forcing an
inclination that was not ripe. But now thou art come to man's estate,
and the season of waiting is ended. Therefore my command is that thou
marry a daughter of kings, whom presently I shall choose for thee; so
shall I have joy in thee before I die, seeing the establishment of my
posterity.'

When Camaralzaman heard these words he shut fast his lips and stood
speechless for a while. But as his eye fell on all those lords
assembled as witnesses as to what he should say, wrath kindled in his
blood and the fire of youth mounted to his brain and he spoke swiftly
and unadvisedly.

'Surely,' he said, 'thou art a man of great age and little sense thus
to talk, having already been answered! Twice before hast thou asked
me, and twice have I refused. Thinkest thou with all these cooks to
make a better broth of me, having thyself failed? I swear now that
rather than marry I will drink the cup of perdition and die: for no
man shall possess himself of my body to give it to another while my
will is contrary!' And so saying Camaralzaman unclasped his hands from
behind his back, and rolling up his sleeves stood before his father all
quivering with anger.

Greatly was Shahzaman, the King, disturbed at receiving so public an
affront from the son whom he loved so tenderly. For a moment he sat
speechless, seeing in the eyes of those around him the reflection of
his humiliation and shame; then his energy returned to him, and rising
from his throne he uttered so terrible a cry of wrath that at once
Camaralzaman became conscious of the enormity of his offence, and his
hasty anger departed leaving only contrition and fear.

Then, at the King's command, the memlooks came and seized him, and
having first bound his hands, dragged him before the throne.

The extremity of Shahzaman's wrath now broke into words, and while the
Prince stood speechless before him, his head bowed down and with drops
of anguish upon his brow, he loaded him with a volume of abuse which
did not spare even the Queen's unblemished reputation. 'Woe to thee,'
he cried, 'baseborn child of iniquity and deceit! Is it thus that a
King is to be answered in the presence of his people? Is it thus that a
son nurtured in the tenderest affection casts insult on the head of his
father. Had such language been uttered by one of the common people, it
had been less disgraceful and more pardonable than coming from thee.'

Then he commanded the memlooks to take him away and imprison him in the
deepest dungeon of the castle, which had long stood neglected and empty.

Servants of the Prince hearing of that order went in haste and prepared
the chamber for his reception; they swept the walls of its cobwebs, and
wiped the damp from the floors; they placed in it a bedstead, and on it
laid a mattress and a leather covering and cushions; they also provided
a large lantern and a candle, for even in the daytime the place was
dark. To this dungeon came Camaralzaman escorted by his guard, and when
all had been made secure and a eunuch set outside to keep watch, there
they left him.

Camaralzaman threw himself upon the couch weeping, for bitterly now
did he repent of his injurious conduct to his father; yet even in his
affliction he ceased not to inveigh against marriage. 'Malediction upon
women!' he cried, 'alas, why were they invented to give sting to the
affections and divide father and son! Had Allah refrained from creating
women, certainly I should not have been here!'

Thus in his misfortune did Camaralzaman find truths to comfort him.
Meanwhile the King, his father, was suffering an equal affliction, and
lacking the philosophy of youth he sought to find comfort in laying the
blame for all that had happened upon the Grand Vizier. 'See, O Vizier!'
he cried, 'what comes of taking counsel with thee! Thou alone hast
been the cause of my son's undoing; for had I spoken to him privately
on this matter as aforetime, he would not have answered me otherwise
than as a son should and in such manner as would have made forgiveness
possible. Now, therefore, since we are brought to this pass by the
foolishness of thy wisdom, it is for thee to devise means by which we
may find a remedy.'

The Vizier replied: 'O King, let the Prince stay where he is for
another fifteen days, so shall he have time to cool himself. I doubt
not that thereafter his mind toward marriage will be all that your
heart can desire. Better to him then will seem the bride's chamber than
the stone walls of his prison.'

Shahzaman took the Vizier's advice and slept on it, or rather slept not
at all, for the loss of his son so troubled him that he lay awake all
night tossing restlessly from side to side and longing for the light of
day.

Far better did Camaralzaman fare; for when night came the eunuch
brought lantern and candle, and having prepared a table set food before
him. The Prince ate little and thought much, sorrow for his ill-conduct
having severed his appetite in half, and when he had finished he
called for water and washed his hands from all taint of food; then he
performed the ablution preparatory to prayer, and recited with his
accustomed regularity the prayers of sunset and nightfall. After that
he sat upon the couch reciting extracts from the Koran: he recited
the chapters from 'The Cow' and 'The Family of Emran' and 'The Two
Preventives'; and having done all these things he commended his soul to
Allah and laid himself down upon the couch, whereon was a mattress of
figured satin showing its pattern on both sides and stuffed abundantly
with ostrich plumes. And when sleep drew near he took off his outer
raiment and clothed himself in a fine shirt of waxed linen, and wrapped
about his head a kerchief of blue muslin so that he seemed like the
moon on its fourteenth night. Then with the lantern at his feet and the
candle at his head, he covered himself with the sheet and fell into the
sleep of the just from which he awakened not till after the third hour,
knowing nought of the hidden event which then awaited him, or what
Allah, who knoweth all secrets, had decreed should befell.

[Illustration: The King of China and Badoura.

'The King came in haste, and found that which till now he had only
pretended, concerning his daughter, apparently come true.' (p. 51)]

Now in the floor of this dungeon was an old well malodorous and foul
through long disuse; and in this well dwelt a female Genie or Efreet,
named Meymooneh, a monster of bad ancestry and of tremendous power to
set evil above good. Toward midnight, when the hour for her nightly
wanderings had come, Meymooneh rose up like a bubble from the bottom of
the well and lifting her head over the brim saw a light which had not
been there formerly and under it a couch whereon lay some one asleep.

Full of wonder, she drew up her feet to earth, and advancing,
cautiously turned back the coverlet from the sleeper's face. Thereafter
she stood for a whole hour lost in wonder and astonishment at the
beauty which she found there: perfect in all its lines and colour and
texture was the loveliness of the sleeping youth, and there arose from
his body an odour like fragrant musk. Meymooneh snuffed at it, and her
heart became enlarged, lifting her thoughts toward Heaven. 'Blessed be
Allah!' she cried, 'surely He must be good to have created this thing.'
And as she continued to gaze, her mind acquired a benevolence which had
long since been strange to it. 'By Allah,' she said, 'in no way will
I injure him; rather will I watch over and protect him from any that
may seek to do him harm.' And so saying she stooped over the youth and
kissed him between the eyes.

Then elated of heart she spread her wings and smiting the earth with
her heel sprang upward and floated away into space, till the heavens
about her were clear. As she rose up through clouds she heard above her
head a flapping of wings, and there passed one she knew by his tail to
be Dahnash, an Efreet greatly inferior in power to herself. After him
she went like a hawk, pounced and caught him by the scruff.

Dahnash, perceiving into whose clutches he had fallen, quivered through
all his members, and imploring pardon for his existence cried, 'I
conjure thee by the Most High Name and the sign on the Seal of Solomon
that this time and for the present thou shouldst release me. So will I
go upon my errand and return presently.'

Then said Meymooneh, 'By the high oath which thou hast sworn, what
errand art thou after?'

Dahnash answered, 'I have seen once with mine eyes that which should
make the wicked virtuous, and the foul-minded clean; therefore I am in
haste to make known the story of it to others less virtuous than thou
art; so that they too may see it and find reward.'

'Though I am more virtuous than thou art,' replied Meymooneh, 'yet
shalt thou tell me thy story, else I will pluck off every scale from
thy body and every feather from thy wings and throw thee to the
bottomless pit. And if what thou tellest be not true then also shalt
thou fare as I have said.'

Then said Dahnash,' O Meymooneh, if my word be not true, invent for
me what tortures thou wilt and I will accept them. I am come to-night
from the farthest isles of China, which are the dominions of King
Gaiour, who is lord also of the Seas and of the Seven Palaces. There
have I seen the Princess, his daughter, for whom also these palaces
were built; surely there is none like her in all the world! Her hair
is as dark as the night of separation and exile, and her face is like
the dawn when lovers meet to embrace; her nose hath both point and
edge, and her cheeks are like petals of anemone filled with wine. When
she speaks, wisdom flows from her tongue; and when she moves, her feet
faint with delight under the burden of the loveliness laid on them.
The King's love for her is so great that there is no limit to what he
will bestow on her if only it may add to her happiness; therefore in
her honour hath he built the seven palaces: the first is of crystal,
the second of marble, the third of steel, the fourth of onyx, the fifth
silver, the sixth is of inlaid gold, and the seventh of all manner of
jewels. Also these palaces are most sumptuously furnished, and around
them lie gardens embellished with everything that can soothe the senses
and delight the eye. Yet all this is but as a shade when the beauty
of the Princess shines in the midst of it. Because the fame of her
incomparable loveliness has gone far and wide, many kings and powerful
princes come to demand her hand in marriage. But so tender is the
King's love for her, that in all these years without her free consent
he has married her to none. Many a time has he sought to persuade her,
but it is all in vain. 'For where,' says the Princess, 'shall I have
honour and freedom such as I enjoy now? Here I sit at thy side in
council and am a ruler over men; but if I marry then will my husband
rule me.' And now there has come to the court of King Gaiour, another
monarch, so dreaded and so powerful that his suit cannot be refused.
Nevertheless the Princess, whose name is Badoura, will not consent;
and having threatened to kill herself rather than submit, the King now
treats her as insane in order to excuse himself, and hath shut her
up in one of her palaces with ten old women to look after her. There
she has been confined for a whole year, but the imprisonment has done
nothing either to change her will or diminish the enchantment of her
beauty. So to-night when I saw her lying asleep every evil thought and
passion died within me, for so holy is her beauty that I respected her
even as I respect myself. Come, Meymooneh, and you shall see what is
indeed a miracle and a wonder!'

So far had Dahnash proceeded, when Meymooneh impatiently interrupted
him. First, she cuffed him over the head, and then spitting in his face
cried with laughter, 'O fool, what eyes have you to behold beauty, or
what tongue to tell of it? This Princess that you speak of is, I doubt
not, a poor insignificant creature not worth looking at. What would you
say, then, if I shewed you my own beloved? Little talk would there be
then of this fine Princess of yours; you would have but to look at him
once and you would go crazy with jealousy.'

Dahnash replied humbly, 'O Mistress of language and of facts, far be it
from me to deny beauty that you yourself have verified; but neither can
I deny that which I, in turn, have beheld and think to be incomparable.
All I can ask, therefore, is that you should accompany me to the
bedchamber of this adorable Princess, where she now lies sleeping, and
judge for yourself.'

'Not so,' answered Meymooneh, 'wherefore should I travel to the far
ends of China merely to prove thy folly and thy falsehood? Here close
at hand is the tower wherein my beloved lies prisoner; come, then, and
see for yourself the face of him whose loveliness even in sleep puts
all other beauty to scorn.'

So they descended, and passing through the roof and floors of the tower
came to the dungeon below, where Camaralzaman lay sleeping. There by
the bedside Meymooneh put forth her hand and drew back the sheet; and
Dahnash gazed with awe and remained silent, for doubt swayed him.
Nevertheless after a while he said, 'O Meymooneh, though my word may
seem hard to believe, yet do I still say that she whom I saw is fairer
than this youth; and needs must it be so, since the fairest woman is by
her sex made fairer than the fairest man. But for that, these two whom
we contend over might be twin flowers from the same stem, so like are
they.'

When Meymooneh heard that she struck him a hard blow over the head with
her wing, crying, 'Go, accursed one, fly back to China, lift up thy
beloved and bring her quickly to this place; so when we see them side
by side shall it be manifest which one is the more beautiful. Then if
I am right thou shalt pay forfeit to me, and if thou art right I will
pay.'

Then with inconceivable swiftness Dahnash departed; and within an hour
returned bearing the Princess in his arms. She was clad in a gown of
finest silk with two borders of gold, and when the Efreet laid her upon
the bed beside Camaralzaman, the two proved to be so alike that they
might have been twin brother and sister. Nevertheless Meymooneh and
Dahnash continued to say each to each, 'My beloved is more beautiful
than thine.' Nor was agreement possible between them.

Therefore after much strife, wherein Dahnash, though physically
worsted, stuck to his opinion, they determined to refer the matter to
an arbitrator, and by his sentence to abide.

Then Meymooneh struck the ground with her foot and cried 'Kashkash!'
Instantly the earth opened and there arose from it an Efreet hideous
to look upon; he was blind of an eye, and lame of a leg, and upon his
back he carried a hump bigger than the rest of his body; and when he
saw Meymooneh he prostrated himself before her, saying, 'O Mistress and
daughter of Kings, what dost thou require of me?'

Meymooneh told him of the contention that had arisen between them, and
showing him the Prince and Princess lying side by side called on him to
say which was the more beautiful of the two.

But Kashkash, having considered them for a while with great attention,
replied, 'When mortals are endowed with such beauty as these, then only
themselves can decide. Let us, then, awake them each in turn, and the
one that draws from the other the most violent protestations of love
and admiration shall be esteemed the more beautiful.'

This proposal was approved both by Meymooneh and Dahnash.

Thereupon Meymooneh transformed herself into a flea, and leaping upon
Camaralzaman's neck bit him in a soft place. The youth put up his hand
and rubbed to allay the smarting; then moving sideways he touched
something that stirred, and starting up saw by his side a maiden of
most marvellous beauty.

No sooner had he beheld her than all his reasons against marriage were
confounded and put to flight; and he said within his heart, 'What God
desireth will come to pass, and what He desireth not will not happen.'
Then taking the Princess by the hand, he endeavoured gently to rouse
her, and ceasing not to invoke her with words and kisses of tenderness,
he would infallibly have awakened her had not Dahnash bound her by a
spell.

Then, seeing how fast she slept, 'What!' cried the Prince, 'must
the love of Camaralzaman admit an impediment such as this? Awake, O
beloved!' Carried away by his words he was tempted for a moment to
assail her rudely, but then the nobility of his nature reasserted
itself and respect for her beauty and innocence constrained him. Then
he bethought himself, and said, 'Doubtless this is the honourable
maiden to whom the King, my father, intended to marry me. Oh why,
instead of argument, did he not show me her face? So would none of this
trouble have come about!'

Then perceiving upon the Princess's finger a ring, he drew it off and
exchanged it for his own, saying, 'Since I may not yet possess myself
of the owner I will take this.' And having so done, he turned his back
to her and slept.

Then Meymooneh, jealous of the testimony which Camaralzaman had given
to the Princess's beauty, transformed herself again into a flea, and
entering beneath the clothes of Badoura, the beloved of Dahnash, bit
her sharply; whereupon she opened her eyes and sat up; and there at
her side beheld a youth snoring in his sleep, with eyelashes shading
roseate cheeks and a mouth like the seal of Solomon. No sooner had she
seen him than her heart was filled with contending emotions. 'Oh me!'
she cried, 'what disgrace is this that has come upon me to be lying
in the same bed with a stranger? But, by Allah, he is so beautiful
that I have much ado not to love him to distraction. Nay, if this be
the Prince who came demanding my hand in marriage of my father, I
would have been willing to marry him ten times over had I but known
beforehand.'

So saying she seized Camaralzaman by the arm and shook him so violently
that, saving for the enchantment, he must surely have awakened.

Thereat she lost patience. 'Self-satisfied youth,' she cried, 'is this
the way to behave to a Princess upon the night of her bridal? What?
has so much beauty made thee proud?' Then as love began to devour her
heart, 'O my lord,' she cried, 'light of mine eyes, and moon of my
existence, arise, awake out of sleep!' And forthwith seizing his hand
she began kissing it. While she was doing so she saw her ring upon his
little finger, and uttered a cry of astonishment; while even greater
became her amaze when she found upon her own hand a strange ring. This,
she thought, must surely mean that she had become wedded to him in her
sleep, so putting away all false modesty and fear she lay down again by
his side, and fell fast asleep.

Then Meymooneh and Dahnash, seeing how evenly between the pair the
balance of love and admiration was divided, composed their difference;
and Dahnash, taking the sleeping Princess upon his shoulder, carried
her back to China.


When Camaralzaman awoke the next morning to find no maiden at his side,
he supposed that the King, his father, had caused her to be carried
away secretly, in order that thereby his desire for her might be
increased. So he called to the slave who guarded him and said, 'Tell me
of the lady who slept with me last night: how came she, and who brought
her?'

The slave replied, 'O Prince, there was no lady; how could any lady get
in while I slept all night across the doorway, and had the key?'

This answer so infuriated the Prince that he fetched the slave a buffet
which knocked him over; then tying him to the well rope he let him
down into the well, though it was the middle of winter; and this he
continued to do, now up, now down, saying as he did so, 'When thou hast
told me the truth I will let thee go.'

After a while the unfortunate slave, at the last gasp for wretchedness,
cried, 'O Prince, restore to me my life and I will tell thee all.'

So Camaralzaman drew him up and laid him to drain upon the floor.

Then the eunuch, with shiverings and chattering of teeth, said, 'Alas,
Master, in my present plight I have not tongue nor wits to tell thee
the whole story. Suffer me to go hence and get dry, then will I
return.' So Camaralzaman let him go.

[Illustration: Camaralzaman as an Astrologer.

'At last the King heard him, and said to the Vizier, "Go down and bring
the Astrologer in."' (p. 67)]

Off ran the eunuch, and without stopping came even as he was into the
presence of Shahzaman, the King. Shahzaman was complaining to the Grand
Vizier of the misery he had endured and the restless night he had
passed, when the slave entered all a-drench with wetness and forthwith
uttered his tidings. 'O King,' he cried, 'insanity hath seized on thy
son, and thus hath he done to me! He saith there hath been a lady in
his bed, when there hath been no lady; and because I cannot tell him
how she came or how she went, or where now he can find her, see from
what a drowning I have escaped!'

When the King heard these words his sorrow for his son and his wrath
against the Vizier knew no bounds. 'Go, accursed,' he cried, 'this is
thy doing. Go to the Prince and discover the true cause of his malady;
then come again and tell me.'

So the Vizier hastened, treading upon his skirts as he went forth in
fear of the King's anger, and coming to the tower found the Prince not
mad at all, but seated upon the couch reciting verses from the Koran
with the utmost composure.

'O Prince,' cried the Vizier, 'the mere sight of thee relieves me of
affliction; but so have I the more reason to complain of that vile
slave who attends on thee, and hath said shameful things concerning
thee to thy father, the King.'

'I also,' answered the Prince, 'have great reason to complain of him;
but let that be for a while, and tell me now what has become of the
lady who slept with me last night? For I know my father must have sent
her to me for a just purpose, and to cure me of my folly: which indeed
she hath done. So let that sweet remedy return to me and you shall find
me sane.'

'Of a truth, Prince,' replied the Vizier, 'the King, thy father, sent
no lady to thee, and all that thou sayest now is mystery. Bethink thee,
shut in here a prisoner, how canst thou have seen any lady with thine
eyes except in a dream?'

'O ill-omened old man,' cried the Prince, 'thou wilt be saying next
that I saw her only with my ears!' And approaching the Vizier he seized
him by the beard, which was long, and twisting it this way and that,
cried, 'Tell me the truth, or I will treat thee as I did the slave!'

Then the Vizier, to save himself from further ill-treatment, replied
even as the slave had done, and said, 'O Prince, I am not free to
reveal the secrets of my master, but I will take to him any message
wherewith you may be pleased to entrust me.'

'Go, then,' answered the Prince, 'and tell my father that I repent of
my former words and will marry the lady he sent to me last night, but
no other, though he should put me to a thousand deaths!'

So the Vizier, as soon as Camaralzaman had let go of his beard,
returned in haste to the King and said to him, 'O my lord, what the
slave says is true; the Prince hath been seized with insanity of the
most violent kind; yea, he heareth with his eyes, and seeth with his
ears, and declareth a lady hath slept with him, whom he will marry and
no other.'

Then Shahzaman went himself to see the Prince and to learn the truth
of this matter, for he doubted the Vizier's word. And when he came to
the prison, his son received him with so much respect, and contrition
and devotion, that he turned upon the Vizier with eyes of anger and
reproach, crying, 'O wretch, why hast thou afflicted me with lies?' But
the Vizier only shook his head sorrowfully, waiting for the truth to
reveal itself.

Then said the King, 'O my son, what day of the week is it?'
Camaralzaman answered, 'To-day is Saturday, to-morrow is Sunday, the
next day is Monday, then comes Tuesday, then Wednesday, then Thursday
and then Friday.'

'Praise be to Allah!' cried the King, 'my son is not mad, for he knows
the days of the week.' Then he said to Camaralzaman, 'Tell me, my son,
who is this lady who, you say, slept with you last night; for truly I
know nothing about her.'

'O my lord,' replied the Prince, 'I pray that you cease to mock me,
for though I have deserved it through my folly, yet now am I ready and
eager to marry this lady whom you have chosen for me, since her beauty
delights me, and her manners, even in her sleep, fascinate me.'

On hearing these words the King was as much astonished as the Vizier
had been; but the countenance of his son was so full of ingenuousness
and truth that he was not as incredulous as the others had been before
him. 'I swear to you, my son,' said he, 'that I know nothing of this
matter. What my Vizier has told you, he invented to appease your anger.
But now tell me everything, just as it happened, for whether it be true
or no, this event has given me cause for rejoicing.'

Then the Prince sat down by his father's side and told him everything,
and when he had finished he showed him the ring for proof that his tale
was true; and the King was so convinced by his son's manner and by all
the incidents of the story, that he had not a word to say against it.

Therefore was his heart uplifted, and he said to Camaralzaman, 'Though
all these things be mysteries in the hands of Allah, so deep that we
may not fathom them, yet now hast thou convinced me that thou art not
as was said of thee. Keep, therefore, that precious mind to which
Heaven hath given light, and possess thyself in patience till the
mystery hath resolved itself.'

But Camaralzaman replied, 'Alas, O my father, to what term of
imprisonment dost thou now condemn me? for if thou canst not find
for me this maiden who hath ravished my heart, surely I shall die of
anguish. So great is my love and my distraction that I cannot wait for
her even an hour.'

Upon this the King smote his palms together, and cried, 'Now are we in
the hands of Allah, where no mortal power can avail!' Then he took his
son gently by the hand and led him back to the palace: and there the
Prince threw himself down upon a bed of sickness, too weak to rise or
look up: and Shahzaman seated himself at his side, mourning and weeping
for his grief, and leaving him neither by day or night.

But after a while his Vizier came to him and said, 'O King of the Age,
how long shall thy people seek for thee, and not find thee? Thy troops
murmur that they have none to lead them to the field, and in the city
corruption grows rife because the seat of judgment stays empty. This
sickness into which the Prince has fallen comes only from grief; and
as his grief increases thine, so does thine give nourishment to his.
Therefore I entreat your Majesty to provide some better relief for the
complaint both of the Prince and of the people. Here in the city his
spirits languish and his strength returns not; but take him to the
palace which is upon the shore looking toward the islands; there shall
his soul, on the days when thou art absent, find peace and refreshment.
And do thou, O King, on two days in each week return to the affairs of
state, which need thy presence, to give audiences and to hold councils,
else out of these two evils which are upon us there may grow a greater.'

[Illustration: Camaralzaman Cures Badoura.

'She ran forth, and threw herself into the arms of Camaralzaman.' (p.
71)]

So Shahzaman did as his Vizier advised him, and caused the Prince to be
carried, all wasted as he was with grief, to a pavilion which was upon
the shore, and there on the days when affairs of state caused the King
to be absent Camaralzaman lay and looked out over the sea.


While these things were happening in the land of Khaledan, Dahnash
had conveyed the Princess of China safely back to her own bed. There
the next morning she awoke, unstained by travel and with her raiment
undisturbed; nor was she conscious that she had been anywhere but where
she now was. No sooner, therefore, did she perceive on looking to left
and right that the youth who had lain in her bosom was no longer near
her than her heart became agitated and her reason confounded, and she
uttered a loud cry.

All her women came running; and her nurse, who was the chief, inquired
what misfortune had befallen her. The Princess, who continued to search
among the bedclothes, said, 'Vexatious and contrary old woman, what
have you done with the beautiful youth who slept last night in my
bosom, or how comes it that I have mislaid him?'

At these words the nurse was shocked in her morals and confounded in
her understanding, and she answered, 'O mistress, what mean these
disgraceful words! Surely thy bosom is guiltless of any such deed, and
no youth, whether beautiful or otherwise, has been near thee.'

Badoura answered, 'He had black eyes and a lovely face, and a mouth
like the seal of Solomon, and his eyebrows were joined where I kissed
them; and he was here sleeping at my side from nightfall to nigh upon
daybreak.'

'Princess,' answered her nurse, 'thou hast had an unpermissible dream
and art talking non-sense. No such young man hath been near thee, nor
would I have permitted it.'

Then the Princess lifting her hand in anger saw upon it the ring which
Camaralzaman had given her in exchange for her own, and cried to her
nurse, 'Woe to thee, O deceitful! Have I also dreamed this ring which
is not mine and lost that which belonged to me?' And so saying she
started to belabour her nurse so unmercifully, that she would assuredly
have killed her had not all the other women and the eunuchs lifted
up their voices in lamentation; whereupon the Princess, who greatly
disliked loud noises, desisted.

So the nurse, escaping from her vengeance, fled and acquainted the King
with all that had happened and with the story which the Princess had
told her.

The King came in haste and found that which till now he had only
pretended concerning his daughter apparently come true. For excess of
reason had fled to her brain, and rushing this way and that she was
searching for her beloved in every cupboard, and under every article of
furniture, crying, 'Where is the beautiful youth who slept in my bosom
last night? He belongs to me; he is mine. If I do not find him I shall
die.'

When her father saw and heard this he inquired no further, but ordered
the slaves and eunuchs to seize her, and bind her with chains lest she
should do herself or others an injury.

So they put a chain about her neck and fastened her to a window of
the palace looking toward the sea, that so by the will of Allah her
thoughts might have rest and her reason be restored. And the King,
loving her tenderly and greatly distressed at the condition she
had fallen into, caused a proclamation to be issued to all sages,
astrologers, and men skilled in such matters saying, 'Whosoever shall
cure my daughter of her present malady, to him will I give her hand
in marriage together with the half of my kingdom; and whoso fails to
cure her, having offered, his head will I strike off and set it above
the gates of my palace as a warning to others.' This he continued to
do till forty of the wisest physicians and astrologers had lost their
heads. Then the supply foiled; and the Princess, whom the offer of
any husband other than the one she sighed for threw into paroxysms of
wrath, was as far from a cure at the end as at the beginning. Thus she
remained for the space of three years, sitting at a window with a chain
about her neck and looking out over the sea.


Now the nurse of the Princess Badoura had a son named Marzavan, who was
a great traveller. He was foster-brother to the Princess; when they
were children she had been to him as his own sister; and the two loved
each other tenderly. So on the day when he returned from his travels he
went to the palace to get tidings of the Princess, and there over the
gates were ranged the heads of the forty wise men. This surprised him
greatly, and when on inquiring into the matter he learned the cause,
he heard also of the unhappy state into which the Princess had fallen.
The news troubled him far more deeply than the death of forty wise men
who had been found foolish, but, unwilling to trust to the judgment of
others in such a case, being himself also well skilled in medicine, he
besought his mother to obtain for him an interview with the Princess.

This was a difficult matter, for the door of the chamber was strictly
guarded, and no one had access to it except the nurse herself. So
urgent, however, was her son's entreaty, that at last she consented and
set about finding the means. To this end she said to the eunuch who was
on guard at the door, 'You know well my devotion to the Princess, and
my desire to do anything that may alleviate her affliction, therefore
I am come to ask you for a favour. I have a daughter whom my mistress
from her earliest childhood, when I nursed them together, has ever
regarded with the tenderest affection. She has lately married, and
the Princess, hearing of this event, has expressed a wish to see her.
Allow this to be; and do not doubt that Heaven will reward you for your
goodness.'

The eunuch readily consented in spite of the strictness of his orders.
'Let her come at night,' he said, 'or bring her yourself, after the
King has retired: then the door shall be open and no one need know of
it.'

Accordingly, the next night, the nurse disguised Marzavan in woman's
attire, and taking his hand in hers led him to the palace. The eunuch
let them pass without suspicion; but as soon as they were in the
Princess's presence, and the door shut behind them, the nurse said,
'O mistress, I have brought gladness to you to-night; for this is no
woman but my son Marzavan, who, having returned from his travels,
wished greatly to see you.' No sooner did the Princess hear the name
of Marzavan than she sprang joyfully forward, the full length of her
chain, and being held back by it, she stretched her hands toward him,
crying, 'O brother, come to me!' When Marzavan beheld her in that
unhappy plight, then for weeping he could not look at her, but turned
away his head and covered his eyes. Then said Badoura, 'Dost thou also
think that I am mad like the rest of them? Nay, hear my story and be
undeceived, for it is true.'

Then she told Marzavan everything; and he, perceiving that she was
in love, doubted no longer, for he knew that such passion and such a
desire for beauty could arise neither out of madness nor of a dream.
So when she besought his aid, he pondered deeply what he might do, and
then said, 'O sister, have patience yet a little while, and I will go
search through the world for thy missing friend. Be assured that if he
lives I will find him.' Then they embraced as brother and sister in
full affection; and Marzavan departed.

The next day he set out once more upon his travels, and continued
to journey from city to city, and island to island for the space of
some months. At first, wherever he went, he heard men speaking of the
beauty of the Princess Badoura and of the strange malady that afflicted
her; but presently, as he changed from country to country, her name
ceased to be upon men's lips, and he heard instead of one by name
Camaralzaman, a prince of the Islands of Khaledan, who for three years
had suffered from a grievous affliction of body and a desolation of
spirit to which there seemed no remedy.

Marzavan did not delay when he heard that story; but inquiring for the
nearest route he took ship and sailed from the city of Torf, where
these tidings had first reached him, to the islands of Khaledan, a
whole month's voyage; and all the way he was glad so that his heart
sang. But on the day when the ship approached the dominions of
Shahzaman, there arose a great storm which broke the mast and carried
away the sail and capsized the vessel.

Marzavan, thrown overboard with the rest, was caught by a strong
current and carried shorewards; and as fate would have it, since the
destiny of all are in the hands of the Most High, the current bore
him toward that part of the coast where stood the palace of the King;
and there at that time, in the pavilion looking toward the sea, sat
Shahzaman attended by his Vizier; and the head of Camaralzaman lay upon
his lap; and a eunuch was whisking the flies from him.

The Vizier, looking out from the terrace, saw in the water below him
the shipwrecked Marzavan, tossed this way and that and unable to land;
so his heart was moved with pity and he came running to the King and
crying, 'Permit me, O my lord, to open the gates of the court and put
forth my hand to save yonder man who is now drowning. For since a just
action is never without reward, it may be he shall bring us good.'

Shahzaman replied, 'Thou art the cause of all our trouble, and I doubt
not that coming by thy hand this drowning man will bring us more. Yet
I cannot forbid thee to save his life: only be sure that he comes not
near us to spy upon my son in his affliction and report it to others.
If he do, his head and thine shall be forfeit.'

So the Vizier ran, and opening the gates of the court leaned down, and
caught Marzavan by the hair and drew him up to dry land. And Marzavan
came forth from the sea all lost to consciousness, his stomach filled
with water and his eyes protruding. The Vizier waited till his spirit
had returned to him; then he took from him his clothes and clad him in
others and put on his head the turban of an attendant and said to him,
'Now, as I have saved thy life, do my bidding and save mine also. Cast
down thine eyes, speak not, look not into any chamber as we go, but
follow closely where I lead lest worse befall thee.'

Then said Marzavan, 'What is this peril that I am not to see?'

The Vizier answered, 'It is the King's son, who is sorely afflicted for
the loss of a fair damsel that came to him but once and is gone again,
none knows where. That is the story, and on pain of death all who hear
it must believe it.' And the Vizier sighed heavily, for at this time
life was hard to him and belief difficult.

When the half-drowned Marzavan heard that, his heart went up like a
singing bird, and he skipt at the Vizier's heels like a squirrel. And
when they came by the chamber where Camaralzaman was lying, with the
King seated beside him, then Marzavan turned swiftly and went in and
stood before him; and no sooner had he seen the Prince than, with an
exclamation of joy, he cried: 'Extolled be the perfection of him who
hath given beauty its pair! Lo, the eyes are hers, the complexion is
hers, the lips and the cheeks are hers!'

At these words the knees of the Vizier went from under him, and he
prayed succour of death: but on the heart of Camaralzaman there
descended a coolness and a refreshment, and turning his tongue in his
mouth, he signalled with his hand to Shahzaman to make the young man
sit down.

The King seeing the look of joy upon his son's face easily forgave the
intrusion which had earned death; and having placed Marzavan in the
seat at the Prince's side, he bade him recount his history and whence
and why he came.

So Marzavan told of the country from which he had come and of its King
and people, and of all the events of his journey, but of the real
cause which had brought him he said nothing. And the Prince listened
and waited, for he saw that something was concealed: and all the
while, since hope had returned to him, his countenance grew bright and
his strength of body increased. So presently he made a sign for his
father to raise him to a sitting posture; and the King, full of joy,
lifted him, and placed cushions behind him and under him. Thus after
three years of lying down did Camaralzaman sit up. So after a while
Shahzaman, seeing how by the conversation of Marzavan the Prince was
restored to health, went away and left them; and the Vizier departed
also.

Then, seeing that they were alone, Marzavan spoke low in the ear of
Camaralzaman saying, 'O Prince, thy sorrow is at an end; for she whom
thou lovest is the Princess Badoura, daughter of the King of China and
my own foster-sister: and I am come through the world seeking thee
because of my devotion to her, who, for love of thee, now lieth in
chains. All that hath happened unto thee with thy father hath happened
to her also with her father, yea, and worse things also.' So he went on
and told him all.

Now when Camaralzaman had heard the story of the Princess, and of her
sufferings and constancy, and of all the useless cures for her malady
that had been tried, his heart was divided in its joy by an overflowing
of sorrow, even as a rich country is divided and broken by a stream
when it floods its banks; and he said to Marzavan, 'Alas! how may I
bring her the true cure, seeing that we dwell in such different parts
of the world, and my father will not suffer me to be out of his sight
even for one day?'

Marzavan answered, 'For thy health's sake he will allow thee that
one, and it shall suffice. For to-morrow thou shalt say to him, "Let
me go out into the hills for a day and a night, that I may hunt and
recover my strength," and surely he shall not deny it to thee. And
when thou hast found that for which thou art in search, I know that
thou wilt return to him. But we will take with us two spare horses and
saddlebags, with money sufficient for our journey, and when we have
started upon our way I will provide, so that we may not be pursued and
overtaken.'

At these words the Prince rejoiced greatly, and it all came about even
as Marzavan had planned. For on the morrow the King, rejoicing that his
son's health was so quickly restored, granted him the permission he
sought, saying only, 'Be not absent, my son, longer than one night, for
while thou art away from me I have no joy left.' Camaralzaman answered,
'The night of sorrow will end, then shall I return.' So he took leave
of his father and departed.

[Illustration: Camaralzaman Finds the Talisman.

'The Prince sow the girdle, and knotted within its folds, a large
stone.' (p. 75)]

For the whole of that day until the evening Camaralzaman and Marzavan
went in the direction they had chosen, setting their laces for the
open country and the seaport lying beyond. And when it was night they
ate and drank, fed their beasts, and rested for a while; then they
remounted and journeyed on. At daybreak they came to a spacious tract
of forest; there Marzavan took one of the led horses and killed it,
stripping the flesh from its bones; next he took the garments which
Camaralzaman had worn on the previous day, and after tearing them this
way and that daubed them with blood.

Camaralzaman inquired why he did this: and Marzavan answered, 'When we
return not great search will be made for thee, and I doubt not, if it
went far enough, we should be overtaken. But when the searchers come
upon this they will suppose that a wild beast has fallen upon thee and
devoured thee; and that I, fearing the King's wrath, have fled away.
Doubtless the news will bring great sorrow to thy father's heart; but
when thou returnest with thine errand safely accomplished, he shall be
recompensed with joy.'

The Prince sorrowfully commended the plan which Marzavan had devised
for the safety of their enterprise; and so they continued upon their
way unmolested, and after much travelling by land and water, and many
adventures not to be told of here, they arrived at the capital of the
dominions of King Gaiour, where the Princess Badoura lay in captivity.

Marzavan did not take Camaralzaman to his own house, but to a public
khan, where for three days they remained recovering from the fatigues
of their journey. Then, having clothed the Prince in the garb of a
merchant-doctor with all the signs and instruments of his calling,
he conducted him to the gates of the palace; standing before which
Camaralzaman began, on the instructions of Marzavan, to cry in a loud
voice, 'Look at me, for I am learned! Marvel at me, for I am wise! I
am the healer, the calculator, the astrologer; I know the cause of
all maladies and their cure. If any one, be he king or peasant, is in
affliction, let him come to me!'

The people were greatly astonished to hear once more an astrologer so
bold of tongue; and pitying him for his youth and wondering at the
beauty of his form, they pointed to the heads which were over the
palace gates, saying, 'While there is time save thyself; for if the
King hear thee thy head will be joined to those.'

Nevertheless Camaralzaman continued to cry with a loud voice; till at
last the King heard him, and said to his Vizier, 'Go down, and bring
this astrologer in.'

So the Vizier went out and fetched him, and Camaralzaman came and
bowed himself before the King. And when the King looked at him, his
heart also was moved with pity toward the stranger, as the heart of
the people had been, because of his youth and the beauty of his form.
And he said to him, 'My son, comply not with my conditions; for I have
bound myself with an oath, and whoso goes in to visit my daughter but
cannot cure her, his head must I strike off; and of a truth you have
but to look over my palace gate to see that her malady is obstinate.
Nevertheless if you can cure her she is yours, and the half of my
kingdom is yours also.'

Camaralzaman said, 'To those conditions, O King, I am agreed!' Then the
King, sighing heavily, sent for the eunuch and bade him conduct the
astrologer to the apartment of the Princess.

The eunuch led the way; but when they were come to the corridor wherein
Badoura's chamber was situated, so great was the joy of the Prince that
he hastened and went before; and the eunuch called after him, 'Tarry,
good sir, and be not so hasty before the event, for I alone have the
key that shall bring thee to thy death! Never was any other astrologer
in such haste to depart from life as thou.'

'Friend,' answered Camaralzaman, 'they had not such science as I have
to make them glad: for they could not tell what the end would be, but
I know it already, nay, even without entering that door of which thou
hast the key I can cure the Princess of her malady.'

The eunuch, astonished to be met with so much confidence, ceased from
his taunts, and admitted the Prince to the ante-chamber. 'If thou canst
do that,' he said, 'thou art indeed the wonder of the world. Truly were
I only permitted to see such a marvel accomplished, I should account
myself rich.'

Thereupon Camaralzaman seated himself against the curtain which divided
the outer from the inner chamber and wrote the following prescription:

'He whom estrangement hath afflicted is cured when the vow of the
beloved is accomplished; and the heart of exile findeth restoration in
union with that which was lost. Love alone can heal those whom love
hath persecuted.'

Underneath this prescription he added the following words:

'From the distracted, the passionate, the perplexed, the famished with
longing, the captive of transport and ardent desire, Camaralzaman, son
of Shahzaman, King of Khaledan, to the peerless one of her age, the
pre-eminent among Hooris, the Princess Badoura, daughter of Gaiour,
King of the Isles of China and lord of the seven Palaces. Behold the
slave of the ring who, sleepless and inflamed by love, now awaits the
call of his Beloved.'

Then, having enclosed the ring which at their first meeting he had
exchanged for his own, he sealed the missive, and putting it into the
hands of the eunuch bade him carry it to his mistress.

No sooner had the Princess Badoura received the missive and the ring
than she knew at once from whom it came. Whereupon joy overthrew her
reason, and leaping up in a transport of exultation she pressed her
feet against the wall, and breaking the chains which bound her ran
forth and threw herself into the arms of Camaralzaman.

Speechless with joy she kissed him without ceasing; even as a pigeon
when it feeds its young, so upon the lips of Camaralzaman fell the
kisses of the Princess Badoura. Then came the nurse, crying aloud for
gladness to behold the joy of her mistress and the healing of her
malady accomplished; and presently after her came the King. For to him
had run the eunuch in swift haste bringing tidings of the event--how
that without entering her chamber the astrologer had cured her. 'What?'
cried the King, 'can such news be true?' 'O my lord,' answered the
eunuch, 'let thine own eyes look upon her and be blest; for she hath
broken her chains of iron, and coming forth to the astrologer she
falleth upon him and kisseth him, and never will she let him go.'

So Gaiour the King came and found it even as the eunuch had said. Full
of joy to behold so sweet a sight, he embraced first the Princess
and then the Prince, thanking him with tears of gratitude for the
debt which he owed him. And when he inquired further and learned of
Camaralzaman his name, and his true rank, and of the country from which
he came, with all the strange story of his love and the grief of his
separation, then his satisfaction and delight knew no bounds. And so on
that very day the nuptials were celebrated, and word of rejoicing went
forth through the whole of the King's dominions.

[Illustration: Prince Camaralzaman and the Birds.

'In the leaves overhead he saw one furiously attacking another with
beak and claw.' (p. 90)]

The hearts of Prince Camaralzaman and his bride were now so full of
happiness that for many months they wist not the passing of time, and
waking or sleeping it seemed to them as one day. But while their joy
thus decked itself in the colours of immortality, the Prince one night
had a dream, wherein he beheld his father, Shahzaman, lying as at the
point of death. And in his dream it seemed that he heard him say, 'O
my son, whom in thy grief I so tenderly cherished, wherefore hast thou
acted thus, leaving me in my old age to die alone?'

So sharp was the sting of that dream upon his conscience that, sighing,
the Prince woke; and his wife hearing him made inquiry as to his
grief. 'Alas!' answered Camaralzaman, 'in my happiness with thee I had
forgotten my father.' And thereupon he recounted his dream. So the next
day the Princess Badoura went to her father, and having told him all,
besought leave for Camaralzaman to return for a while to his own land
so that he might comfort his father in his old age.

The King readily granted his daughter's request. Then said Badoura,
'If my husband goes I must go too.' 'Why so?' inquired her father.
'Because,' said she, 'if you separate us there is no power in the world
that shall keep me alive.'

Now the King had learned during the years of his daughter's captivity,
that anything which she said she meant. Therefore with much grief
and reluctance at being so compelled, he granted her request; and
having accorded them permission to be absent for a whole year, he made
preparation for their departure. In order that they might appear at
the court of Shahzaman in the splendour that became their rank, he
presented them with many changes of costly apparel, and having provided
a large train of horses, dromedaries, and attendants, he bade them an
affectionate farewell, and with many tears watched them depart.

For a whole month Camaralzaman and his bride travelled in comfort and
luxury by the route that they had chosen, and greatly was the Prince's
heart rejoiced by the thought of seeing his father once more and
presenting to his eyes the lovely and innocent cause of all their past
affliction. Therefore, early and late they journeyed on, only stopping
to rest at night and during the heat of each day.

And so it chanced that one day, about noon, they came to a spacious
meadow shaded by trees, and there at the Prince's command the tents
were pitched; and the Princess went into her pavilion and lay down to
sleep.

Now when she lay down, the heat being very great, she took off her
outer robe and her girdle. And the Prince, coming in later, saw the
girdle lying, and knotted within its folds a large stone, red as
blood, inscribed with strange characters which, in the darkness of the
tent, he could not read. Being curious, therefore, to see what words
were upon this talisman which the Princess carried so secretly in her
apparel, he unfastened the knot, and taking the knot went forth from
the tent to examine it.

Scarcely had he done so when, with a strange cry, a bird swooped down
from the tree above his head, caught up the stone in its beak, and flew
away with it. Camaralzaman, fearing to lose what, for all he knew,
might be a precious talisman, ran after the bird, throwing up his
arms, shouting and endeavouring in all possible ways to make it let go
the stone. But the bird flew on from tree to tree, and from valley to
valley, never so fast that Camaralzaman could not keep pace with it,
but never coming within his reach, or letting go of the talisman. So
the flight went on and so the chase continued, till several hours had
passed and it began to grow dark. Then the bird, uttering once more its
strange cry, went up to the topmost branch of a high tree and settled
itself to roost.

The pursuit had now led Camaralzaman so far and in so many directions,
that he no longer knew which way to turn. So, commending himself to
Allah, he lay down at the foot of the tree and slept.

In the morning, with a loud rustling of feathers, the bird awakened
him, and still carrying the stone in its beak, sprang out of the tree
and continued its flight. And as Camaralzaman rose and followed, it
presently became apparent that at whatever rate he went, the bird went
too; so when he ran the bird flew fast, and when he could run no more
it waited for him, flying from point to point and never disappearing
from view.

'By Allah!' cried Camaralzaman, 'this is wonderful! This chase will
lead me either to great fortune or to death.' So without giving up he
went on; and thus he followed the bird for ten days, living upon roots
and drinking of the streams that he crossed; and every night he slept
at the foot of some tree while the bird perched in its topmost branches.

Thus on the tenth day he was brought to the outskirts of a large
city. Then, like a flash, the bird flew over it and disappeared; and
Camaralzaman following, footsore and weary, came to the city gates and
passed through. Here for some time he wandered, solitary and without
hope, not knowing what to do nor of whom to seek aid; and coming
presently to the other side of the city, he found there a harbour
with much shipping and merchandise, and people plying their trade and
talking in many languages. And as he walked along the shore, still
uncertain what course to pursue, he came upon an old man working in a
garden of flowers; and when he halted the old man looked up.

The gardener, seeing a stranger at his gate, came forward, and saluting
him in the name of Allah, bade him come in. 'I see by your dress,'
said he, 'that you are a Mussulman, as I also am; and great is your
good fortune to have escaped until now the wrath of the inhabitants,
for they are unbelievers and idolaters, and fierce is their hatred for
those who are of the true faith. Therefore come quickly into my house,
and disguise yourself; else is your life not safe.'

Camaralzaman was thankful to have found a friend in such a moment of
need; and after his host had supplied him with food and drink and made
him rest for a while, then without concealment he confided to him the
whole of his story. Greater than ever had now become his longing to
reach the island of Khaledan, for there not only did he hope to find
his father still alive, but to be re-united with his wife, the Princess
Badoura. Inquiring therefore of the old gardener, he learned that there
were two routes; the longer being for the greater part of the way by
land--a year's journey, and the shorter by sea. 'But if,' said the
gardener, 'you would go by sea, then you must wait for the merchant
ship which sails every year to the Island of Ebony, for through that
country lies your way. Had you but come a few days earlier, you would
have been in time; but now the ship has left the harbour and will not
return for another year. If you decide upon this course, then while you
wait my house is open to you, and if you are willing to share my work
and be my assistant, you shall also have a fair share of the profits.'

Camaralzaman gladly accepted the proposition, for better by far is
work, however hard or humble it may be, than the idleness of unavailing
regret. So for a whole year he lived with the old gardener as if he
had been his son, wearing a blue smock down to his knees, working with
a hoe, tending plants, tilling the soil, and carrying its produce
for sale to the market. And every day he looked out over the sea for
the merchant vessel which was to arrive and bear him back to his own
country and to the arms of his beloved.


Now turn we to the Princess Badoura, whom we left lying asleep in her
tent. When she awoke she inquired after her husband, the Prince, but
he was not to be found; some had seen him go into the tent, but no
one had seen him come out. Then, as she put on her dress, she noticed
that the knot in her girdle had been untied and that the stone was
missing. 'Alas, O Beloved, what hast thou done?' she cried. 'Ignorant
of its virtues thou hast taken from me the talisman which unites us;
now surely if thou hast lost it we shall be separated for ever.' And
as time went on her distress and her certainty of misfortune became
greater; for she knew that had not the Prince already lost the talisman
its infallible virtues would by now have brought him back to her.
Knowing therefore that if the talisman were indeed lost, he also was
lost to her, and that when found, he would return to her again, she
made no useless delay in proceeding to her destination. Yet was there
now great peril if the absence of the Prince were discovered, lest she
and her women and all the wealth which her father had bestowed on her
might fall a prey to the men who formed their escort. For this reason
she concealed the matter from all but her women, and having dressed
herself in some of her husband's clothes, and put into her litter a
girl-slave wearing the royal veil, she went forth from her tent and
gave orders for the camp to be struck and their journey resumed.
So, for many days she continued to travel by land and sea, till she
came before a city set on a height with a great harbour lying below;
and when she inquired its name of the inhabitants they said to her,
'This is the city of Ebony, wherein dwells King Amanos, and he has a
beautiful daughter whose name is Hayatelnefoos.'

Presently word went to the palace that a stranger prince of very noble
appearance, accompanied by a large retinue, had arrived in the harbour
and was seeking admission to the city. Whereupon the King sent in haste
certain high dignitaries of his court to give welcome and to conduct
the supposed Prince into his presence. And no sooner had he beheld the
noble appearance of his guest and the graciousness of her bearing than
he gave orders for a great banquet to be prepared, appointed that she
should be lodged in the palace, and extended to her for three days an
entertainment of the most royal magnificence.

During the whole of these festivities the Princess bore herself exactly
as Camaralzaman would have done, doing honour to that rank and name
which for her own protection she had assumed. Therefore the heart of
King Amanos was drawn greatly towards her, and when she began to speak
of departure, he said, 'Wherefore, O Prince, shouldst thou seek to
leave a country where happiness and power can be thine? For behold, I
am an old man and childless, save for one daughter, whose beauty and
perfection resemble thine. But, for me, the cares of state have become
too heavy a burden, and I sigh to be released from them. Remain with
us, therefore, and I will give to thee even now the hand of my daughter
and the sceptre and rule of my kingdom.'

At this proposal, so generously expressed, the face of Badoura became
covered with bashfulness, for strange indeed to a woman was this offer
of a kingdom and a bride. Yet at her father's court she had long since
become learned in the affairs of state, and to rule a kingdom had ever
been her desire; moreover, since by the loss of the talisman she and
her husband seemed destined to eternal separation, there was no cause
that she could see why her life should not thus be dedicated; there was
also some peril in a refusal, which the King would be certain to take
as an affront both to himself and his daughter. So after pondering the
matter for a while she lifted her head and spoke to the King as follows:

'O King, if I delayed for one moment my acceptance of so splendid an
offer, it was only a knowledge of unworthiness which held me back. Yet
to delay longer might seem to throw a doubt on the discretion of your
royal mind. Beset by these two dangers I place myself entirely in your
Majesty's hands; and if I may have your promise of the guidance and
counsel which I shall constantly need, then I will unreservedly accept
your Majesty's proposal. To hear is to obey.'

The marriage being thus agreed on, the nuptial ceremony was fixed for
the following day. The pretended Prince, putting a bold face upon the
matter, informed the officers of her escort of the coming event, saying
also that the Princess Badoura had given it her approval. As for her
women, their silence was already assured since, as partners to the
deception, their very lives depended on it.

So on the morrow King Amanos gathered together his emirs, viziers,
and captains, and having presented to them the Princess Badoura as
his destined son-in-law and heir, he placed her upon the throne and
gave orders for the nuptial ceremony to commence. And when the day of
rejoicings was ended, the Princess Badoura was conducted to the bridal
chamber.

But no sooner did Badoura find herself by the side of the beautiful
Princess Hayatelnefoos than the thought of her beloved Camaralzaman
overwhelmed her with grief, and committing herself to prayer and
recitation, she continued at her devotions till the bride lay fast
asleep. And thus she did the next night and on the night following.

Finding herself thus neglected by the husband of whom she had received
such glowing reports, the Princess Hayatelnefoos was filled with a
depression of spirit which immediately became visible in her looks; and
when her father, King Amanos, discerning his daughter's grief, inquired
what was amiss, she informed him that her husband, whom she already
loved most tenderly, had conceived for her an aversion so intense that
to avoid all intimacy of conversation he committed himself to prayer,
and thus continued till weariness and sleep overcame her.

At this news the countenance of King Amanos was darkened, and he said
to his daughter, 'If the Prince does not treat thee with the respect
due from a husband to a wife, he shall be divested of his royal dignity
and banished from my kingdom.'

This threat so afflicted the heart of Hayatelnefoos, to whom the
thought of separation from her husband was already unbearable, that on
their next meeting she confided to Badoura her grief, informing her
also of the King's words and of the danger that threatened her.

Then said Badoura, 'O amiable and charming Princess, though thou canst
not be my wife thou canst be my friend. Hear first my story, and
then, if thou art unable to pardon me thou canst at least have the
satisfaction of depriving me of life.' And forthwith she proceeded to
give the full story of her adventures.

When she had finished, Hayatelnefoos replied, 'O Princess, I should
indeed be unworthy of your confidence, if such a tale of misfortune
had failed to win not only my pity, but my devotion. Henceforth we two
are of one mind, and will have between us but one heart and one desire
for the preservation of thy life and honour and the restoration of thy
husband.'

[Illustration: Badoura Watching the Ship.

'It so happened as the ship came into the harbour, Badoura was looking
out towards the sea.' (p. 96)]

Thereupon the two Princesses embraced with the tenderest affection, and
from that day on, concealing from all others the true facts, they lived
together in the greatest amity and concord; while the Princess Badoura
continued in her husband's name to rule over the city of Ebony, giving
law and justice to all.


Prince Camaralzaman, meanwhile, was living with the old gardener,
tilling the soil, and carrying each day fruit and vegetables to the
market. The time was now near for the merchant vessel which he was
awaiting to return; but having lost the talisman of which he had come
in quest, he had little hope of a successful issue to the adventure. So
one day, when the inhabitants of the city were making holiday and all
the markets were closed, the Prince, released from labour, sat in deep
dejection of spirit under the trees of the garden away from the sound
of festival, when suddenly he heard a strange cry of birds and in the
leaves overhead he saw one furiously attacking another with beak and
claw. So desperate was the fight, that before many minutes were over
one of the birds fell dead at his feet, and the conqueror, uttering a
loud cry of triumph, flew swiftly away.

But hardly had it disappeared, when two other birds of larger size
came flying into the garden, and making straight for the murdered body
they bowed their heads over it, crying lamentably and seeking with the
warmth of their breasts to restore it to life. Presently, when all
their efforts proved vain, they scooped a grave with their claws, and
having laid therein the slaughtered bird, they covered it with earth
and immediately soared upward and disappeared.

Camaralzaman sat weeping; for the mourning of these birds reminded him
in some way of the grief and separation he himself had endured, and as
little could he hope for the return of his lost happiness as they for
the revival of their dead comrade. As he was thus thinking, once again
came the strange cry he had heard before, and looking up he saw the
two birds flying back carrying the murderer in their claws. No sooner
had they alighted above the grave than falling upon their captive they
tore out his heart and entrails, and having drained out his blood as an
offering to the slain, they left the body lying, and flew away.

All this while Camaralzaman had looked on in wonder; and surely it
seemed to him that if, in the lower order of creation such miracles
of devotion and service were wrought, humanity had no cause for
despair. And even as he so thought, he saw in the torn body of the bird
something that shone brightly, and coming nearer he recognised it as
the talisman which he had taken from his wife's girdle.

Instantly all life became changed to him; seizing the stone he wiped it
of blood and pressed it a thousand times to his lips. 'Now at last,' he
cried, 'I believe and know that my beloved is to be restored to me!'

So sure was he his good fortune had now returned to him that, unable to
remain idle and inactive, he seized a hoe, and started to break up the
ground at the foot of the tree under which he had been standing. At the
third stroke the earth gave back a hollow and metallic sound. Quickly
removing the soil he discovered a trapdoor, which, when it was opened,
disclosed an aperture and a narrow flight of steps. Descending these he
found himself in a deep cellar lined with jars, twenty in all, filled
with red gold.

Contentment now took hold of his spirit, and having returned to the
garden he replaced the trap and continued at his work until in the
evening the old gardener returned from the festivities.

On seeing him the old man said, 'Rejoice, my son, I bring you good
tidings. The ship which you have so long waited for is now in the
harbour, and in three days will be ready once more to set sail.'

This news so delighted Camaralzaman that taking the old man's hand he
kissed it saying, 'I too have tidings for you of a happy kind.' And
leading the gardener to the tree he lifted the trap, and disclosed to
his astonished eyes the gold that lay stored below.

'Well,' said the gardener, 'I am glad that my poor plot of ground
should have yielded thee such rich fruit. Take it, my son, and Heaven
prosper thee by its aid till thou come once more to thine own land and
the heart of thy beloved.'

'Not so,' replied Camaralzaman, 'I will take nothing if I may not share
it equally with thee.'

So it was agreed. Then said the gardener, 'My son, hast thou thought
how to convey safely so much gold on a voyage where thou wilt be alone
in the hands of strangers? Surely if they find thee possessed of such
wealth they will kill thee for the sake of it. Hearken, therefore, to
what I shall advise. From this country we send olives into all parts
of the world, and many ships go laden with them. Fill for thyself,
therefore, fifty jars from the olive-trees which are in this garden,
and at the bottom of each jar lay a portion of the gold: so shall it be
safe, and no man will know of it.'

So the Prince did as the gardener advised; and fearing lest, while on
the voyage, he himself might be robbed, he put the talisman along with
the gold in one of the olive jars, marking it with a number so that
he might know it again. Then he made a bargain with the owner of the
vessel, and on the third day the seamen came and carried away the jars
and stowed them on board. And the captain said to Camaralzaman, who had
accompanied them, 'Do not be long in returning, for the wind is fair
and I only wait for you to set sail.'

So Camaralzaman hastened back to say farewell to the old gardener and
to thank him for all that he had done; but when he arrived at the house
he found the old man so stricken with grief at his departure that he
was already at the point of death. Camaralzaman therefore sat down
by his bed and tended him, holding him by the hand and speaking many
comfortable words; and toward evening, having made his profession of
faith, as all good Mussulmans do, the old man let fell his head and
expired.

Camaralzaman closed his eyes, wrapped his body for burial, and having
dug a grave in the garden, interred it. Then he went down in haste to
the shore and found that the vessel had gone.

Once again, therefore, despair returned to him, for now a second time
the talisman was lost, and he had no hope of recovering it. Also he
must needs wait another year before the ship could return and take him
upon his way. So going to the landlord of the garden he became a tenant
in the place of his dead friend, and hiding what remained of the gold
in fifty other olive jars, he set to work once more as a gardener until
the time should once more come round for him to embark.


Meantime, under a favourable wind, the ship arrived at the island of
Ebony; and it so happened that as it came into the harbour the Princess
Badoura was looking out of one of the palace windows toward the sea.
No sooner did her eyes rest upon the sails of that ship than her heart
became uplifted with joy. 'Surely,' she said to herself, 'either my
beloved is there on board or it brings news of him.'

[Illustration: Capture of Camaralzaman.

'The captain of the ship goes to capture Camaralzaman at the command of
Badoura.' (p. 99)]

So going down to the shore, accompanied by her emirs and attendants,
she caused the master of the vessel to be summoned before her and
inquired of him what merchandise he had brought. 'O King,' replied the
captain, 'I have spices, drugs, aromatic scents, and sweet ointments;
I have also rich fabrics and metal-work; and in addition to all these
things I have olives such as are not to be found in any other country,
and these, since I came by them fortunately, I can let you have cheap.'
On hearing this a desire for the olives took hold of the Princess, and
she said, 'What quantity have you brought?' 'Fifty jars,' answered the
master; 'that is all I have.' 'Well,' said the Princess, 'I will take
fifty.' And she paid him for them the price that he asked--a thousand
pieces of silver.

Now presently, when the olives had been conveyed to the palace, there
came upon the Princess a strange desire to taste that which she had
just purchased, so she gave orders for one of the jars to be opened and
the contents to be poured into a dish; and as the attendant poured,
first came olives and then a heap of red gold.

Then said Badoura to the Princess Hayatelnefoos, who alone was with
her, 'That is gold!' So she examined further and in every jar found
gold in equal quantity. Presently as she emptied one of the jars, along
with the gold came the talisman which Camaralzaman had concealed there;
and no sooner did the Princess Badoura see it than she knew it again;
and she showed it to Hayatelnefoos, saying, 'Lo, this is the stone
whose loss hath caused our separation; now, finding it again, I know
that my beloved will be restored to me.'

Then she sent in haste and caused the master of the vessel to be
brought before her, and she said to him, 'Whence had you these olives?
Tell me the truth, or you shall die!'

Thereupon the master being smitten in his conscience dropped to earth
and lay there, crying, 'Alas, I had them of a poor man who brought
them himself to the vessel but did not return at the appointed time;
therefore I sailed without him. Be assured, O King, that all the money
I got for them shall be honestly paid to him.'

Then said Badoura, 'As to that I care not. But go back straightway
to that country from which you came and find the man and bring him
to me, for he is a malefactor against the laws of this kingdom, for
he hath stolen from me a precious thing dearer than life itself;
therefore is his life forfeit. And if you fail to bring him, then all
the merchandise which you have now brought I will hold, and no ship or
merchandise of yours shall ever enter this port again. But if you bring
him safely, I will reward you abundantly.'

The master therefore, being so compelled, left his merchandise in bond
and returned with all haste to the port from which he had set out, and
there coming with his men to the house of Camaralzaman, he knocked; and
no sooner had the Prince opened than, seizing him, they carried him
off, and bestowed him on board the vessel as a prisoner.

Camaralzaman said to them, 'Masters, why are you treating me thus?'
They answered, 'Thou art an offender and malefactor against the King of
the Ebony Isles, son to the King Amanos, and hast stolen his wealth;
yea, a precious thing hast thou stolen from him, and now he requires it
of thee!'

'Well,' said Camaralzaman, 'this is the first that I have heard of it.'

So they bore him away, and after they had sailed for some while they
came again to the city of Ebony, and word was sent to the palace that
the master of the vessel had returned bringing the King his prisoner.

Then Badoura gave orders, and Camaralzaman, still in his workman's
dress, his body wasted with grief, and his face and hands soiled with
the defilements of his long voyage, came and stood before her. As soon
as she saw him her heart leapt with joy, but she feared to reveal
herself, for how would it appear to her emirs and chamberlains were she
before all eyes to throw herself into the arms of a common gardener.
Therefore, retaining her disguise, she spoke to him as a King should do
to a peasant, and in a man's voice. And Camaralzaman, fearful of the
unknown charge which was to be brought against him, stood before her
with bowed head and did not look up.

The Princess asked him but a few questions, of the country from which
he had come, of the time that he had lived there, and what calling
he had followed. Then she said to him, 'Be assured that if thou art
innocent of that which is charged against thee, thine honour and
integrity shall be made known to all. Even now if thou wilt confess to
having taken a thing which is not thine and wilt restore it to me, I
am willing to pardon thee, seeing that it was done without thought of
evil.' But Camaralzaman hearing these words knew not what they meant,
for his thoughts were all astray and he did not dream that it was of
himself and of the talisman that she spoke.

Then Badoura ordered an officer of her household to take charge of
the prisoner and treat him with all care; and having recompensed the
master of the vessel and set free his merchandise, she went in to
Hayatelnefoos, and told her of all that had come about. And she said
to her, 'O bosom-friend and comforter of my heart, be sure that what
brings happiness to me shall bring it to thee also; for no fortune
shall Heaven send me, nor any bliss, however great, that I am not ready
to share equally with thee.' Then speaking of Camaralzaman she said,
'So great a distance divides in men's eyes what seems his present lot
from ours, that it were peril to be sudden in this matter lest the
truth of our story should not be believed. Therefore we must wait till
of his own natural nobleness he shall have raised himself in the eyes
of all.' And to this plan Queen Hayatelnefoos agreed.

So the next day Badoura gave orders to conduct Camaralzaman to the
bath; then she caused him to be clad in an emir's robes and brought
forth where all might see; and lo! as a willow branch after rain or the
planet of love shining at dusk, so seemed he then to the eyes of all.

Then again she caused him to be brought before her in the Hall of
Judgment and pronounced him clear of all that had been charged against
him. 'For that which was precious to me,' she said, 'has been restored;
and other hands held it from me, not thine. Therefore as thou hast been
proved true I will appoint thee to high honour.' Then addressing the
emirs and councillors who were gathered about her she said, 'My lords,
this Camaralzaman whom to-day I admit to my Councils is not unworthy of
the high post which I confer on him; for not only have I tested him as
ye have seen on an accusation whereof he is innocent, but he is a man
of approved valour, of grace, and learning, being also a descendant of
kings.'

Great was Camaralzaman's astonishment at finding his name and lineage
known to the King of the Ebony Isles; but not daring to question how
his good fortune had come about he prostrated himself before the
throne, saying, 'O King, only by thy favour have I been raised to this
honour, and by that alone can I either deserve or maintain it.' So the
Council ended, and Camaralzaman was conducted to a large and sumptuous
abode with slaves and attendants to wait upon him, and everything that
his heart could desire save only his beloved Princess.

After a few days Badoura, wishing to find occasion for Camaralzaman's
more frequent presence, appointed him to the office of Grand Treasurer,
and thereafter scarcely a day passed that she did not bestow on him
fresh honours; while Camaralzaman, for his part, wondering why such
high favours were shown him, served the King diligently, and was
greatly respected not only by all the emirs and officials of the Court,
but by the common people, who swore by his life, and would have asked
no better than for such an one as he to be their ruler.

So time went on, and ever did the wonder of Camaralzaman increase why
he alone had been chosen for such great honours. And because this thing
seemed to him without reason, he came at last to fear it. Furthermore,
for loss of his beloved, restlessness and the desire for travel filled
his heart, and in no one place could he find happiness. So one day
coming to the King--that is to say to Badoura--he spoke as follows: 'O
King of the Age, so great is the favour that thou hast shown me, that I
know well it cannot last. Suffer me therefore to depart before I have
outstayed my welcome; so shall my gratitude be undiminished and the
nature of thy regard for me unchanged.' When Badoura heard these words
she smiled on him and said: 'If indeed it is thy will to depart, then
must thou take and cast away once more--yea, lose utterly--this stone
whose virtue brought thee back to me, and by which, while it is in my
possession, our lives are bound.' So saying she reached out and put the
talisman in his hand.

When Camaralzaman beheld the stone once more his wonder was beyond
words. 'O King,' he cried, 'whence came this to thee? For herein lies
the cause of all my afflictions and separation from one whom I loved as
my own soul.'

'Surely,' answered Badoura, 'none can part from that talisman without
estrangement and separation. And since now I have parted from it to
thee, our separation must infallibly begin from this hour. Therefore
the King of the Ebony Isles thou shalt see no more.'

So saying she passed out of the chamber, and Camaralzaman stood and
wondered, not knowing what to think.

Then Badoura went in haste to a closet, and there she put on the
dress and the girdle which she had worn on the day of separation; and
taking from her head the man's turban, she spread her hair and put on
a head-dress of fine gold delicately wrought. So she returned to him,
and when Camaralzaman saw her he uttered a cry and ran into her arms
and held her with kisses as if he could never let her go. And when at
last he spoke of things other than his joy--'How,' he inquired, 'has
the King accomplished this miracle? Surely when he spoke I understood
nothing of what he said.'

Badoura smiled as she answered: 'When the King put the talisman into
thy hand, then did his kingship cease, and he returned once more to his
true form. O my lord, look upon thy king, who is now become thy slave.
Surely hadst thou loved me a little more thou wouldst have known me.'

Then she told Camaralzaman of all that had happened to her from first
to last; and on the morrow she went to King Amanos, and to him also
made her story plain. Nor would she allow that any deception had been
used, 'For truly,' she said, 'I and my beloved are one; and I did but
come before and prepare for him the place which he was destined to
fill. Therefore when I married thy daughter, it was Camaralzaman who
married her; and when I accepted of thee the crown, it was Camaralzaman
who accepted it. Give me leave, therefore, O King, who hast been to me
as a father, to show my beloved to the Queen whom I have won for him,
and to the people over whom, in his name, I have ruled.'

Greatly was King Amanos astonished to hear a woman utter such words;
and the wonder of Camaralzaman was scarcely less. Yet, as she had
brought fortune and happiness to both alike, they consented to do her
will; and so it was agreed.

Therefore from that day on did Camaralzaman take up the power and
authority which Badoura had attained for him, rejoicing also in the
domestic felicity of two wives, the one as beautiful as the other,
each without jealousy, and having no wish or thought out of which
estrangement could arise. Doubtless it was the perfect happiness in
which he thus dwelt which caused Camaralzaman to forget altogether the
object for which his journey had been begun. No second dream of his
father, the King Shahzaman, ever came to remind him of his neglected
purpose, while to the dominions of King Gaiour of China he had no wish
to return.



Epilogue


'This, O King, is the story of Prince Camaralzaman and of the Princess
Badoura from the time of their falling in love until the day when
all their wanderings of separation were ended. A year later the two
Queens each presented him with a son almost upon the same day. And the
birth of these Princes was celebrated with every kind of festivity and
rejoicing.'

As Scheherazade concluded her story the light of dawn grew full. For a
thousand and one nights she had given entertainment to her lord, saving
at the same time the lives of her fellow-women. During this period she
had borne the King three children, all with so strong a resemblance
to their father that even he could find no cause in them for casting
suspicion upon his wife's virtue.

So the tale being ended Scheherazade rose, and having kissed the ground
at the King's feet, said, 'O King of the Age, perfect and incomparable,
lo in dust and ashes I thy slave come to present to thee a petition.'
And the King said, 'Ask, and it shall be granted thee.'

Then Scheherazade called to her attendants and said, 'Bring in the
children!' So they brought the children quickly; one of them walked,
one crawled, and one lay at the breast.

So she set them before the King, and said, 'These children are thine
and mine. In pain I bore them, having little hope of any joy that
they might bring me; for under sentence of death I brought them into
the world, and though thrice I have been a mother thou hast not yet
pardoned me. Say, therefore, O King, when is my death to be; or, if it
is not to be, then let my suspense be ended.'

At these words the King wept; and embracing his children tenderly,
cried: 'O Scheherazade, by Allah I swear to thee that before the coming
of these children thou wast pardoned already. Nor shall the death of
such an one as thou be laid to my charge when Kings come before God to
be judged.'

[Illustration: The Final Marriage Procession.]

Then Scheherazade fell down and kissed his feet and his hands, crying,
'God give thee a long life, and power and strength, and dominion and
majesty to the world's end.'

Joy of that news spread through the palace, and thence to the city and
all the people; and the night of rejoicing that followed was a night
not to be reckoned among lives, for its colour was as the rainbow in
its promise over young fields of corn, and its light whiter than the
face of day.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Princess Badoura, by Laurence Housman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCESS BADOURA ***

***** This file should be named 51219-0.txt or 51219-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/1/51219/

Produced by Madeleine Fournier. Images from the Collection
of The Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
